

Site Reliability Engineering

Site Reliability Engineering

DevOps or SRE?
The term "DevOps" emerged in industry in late 2008 and as of this writing (early 2016) is still in a state of flux. Its core principles-involvement of the IT function in each phase of a system's design and development, heavy reliance on automation versus human effort, the application of engineering practices and tools to operations tasks-are consistent with many of SRE's principles and practices. One could view DevOps as a generalization of several core SRE principles to a wider range of organizations, management structures, and personnel. One could equivalently view SRE as a specific implementation of DevOps with some idiosyncratic extensions.

Tenets of SRE

While the nuances of workflows, priorities, and day-to-day operations vary from SRE team to SRE team, all share a set of basic responsibilities for the service(s) they support, and adhere to the same core tenets. In general, an SRE team is responsible for the availability, latency, performance, efficiency, change management, monitoring, emergency response, and capacity planning of their service(s). We have codified rules of engagement and principles for how SRE teams interact with their environment-not only the production environment, but also the product development teams, the testing teams, the users, and so on. Those rules and work practices help us to maintain our focus on engineering work, as opposed to operations work.
The following section discusses each of the core tenets of Google SRE.

Ensuring a Durable Focus on Engineering

As already discussed, Google caps operational work for SREs at 50% of their time. Their remaining time should be spent using their coding skills on project work. In practice, this is accomplished by monitoring the amount of operational work being done by SREs, and redirecting excess operational work to the product development teams: reassigning bugs and tickets to development managers, [re]integrating developers into on-call pager rotations, and so on. The redirection ends when the operational load drops back to 50% or lower. This also provides an effective feedback mechanism, guiding developers to build systems that don't need manual intervention. This approach works well when the entire organization-SRE and development alike-understands why the safety valve mechanism exists, and supports the goal of having no overflow events because the product doesn't generate enough operational load to require it.
When they are focused on operations work, on average, SREs should receive a maximum of two events per 8-12-hour on-call shift. This target volume gives the on-call engineer enough time to handle the event accurately and quickly, clean up and restore normal service, and then conduct a postmortem. If more than two events occur regularly per on-call shift, problems can't be investigated thoroughly and engineers are sufficiently overwhelmed to prevent them from learning from these events. A scenario of pager fatigue also won't improve with scale. Conversely, if on-call SREs consistently receive fewer than one event per shift, keeping them on point is a waste of their time.

Postmortems should be written for all significant incidents, regardless of whether or not they paged; postmortems that did not trigger a page are even more valuable, as they likely point to clear monitoring gaps. This investigation should establish what happened in detail, find all root causes of the event, and assign actions to correct the problem or improve how it is addressed next time. Google operates under a blame-free postmortem culture, with the goal of exposing faults and applying engineering to fix these faults, rather than avoiding or minimizing them.

Pursuing Maximum Change Velocity Without Violating a Service's SLO
Product development and SRE teams can enjoy a productive working relationship by eliminating the structural conflict in their respective goals. The structural conflict is between pace of innovation and product stability, and as described earlier, this conflict often is expressed indirectly. In SRE we bring this conflict to the fore, and then resolve it with the introduction of an error budget.
The error budget stems from the observation that 100% is the wrong reliability target for basically everything (pacemakers and anti-lock brakes being notable exceptions). In general, for any software service or system, 100% is not the right reliability target because no user can tell the difference between a system being 100% available and 99.999% available. There are many other systems in the path between user and service (their laptop, their home WiFi, their ISP, the power grid...) and those systems collectively are far less than 99.999% available. Thus, the marginal difference between 99.999% and 100% gets lost in the noise of other unavailability, and the user receives no benefit from the enormous effort required to add that last 0.001% of availability.
If 100% is the wrong reliability target for a system, what, then, is the right reliability target for the system? This actually isn't a technical question at all- it's a product question, which should take the following considerations into account:
What level of availability will the users be happy with, given how they use the product?
What alternatives are available to users who are dissatisfied with the product's availability?
What happens to users' usage of the product at different availability levels?

The business or the product must establish the system's availability target. Once that target is established, the error budget is one minus the availability target. A service that's 99.99% available is 0.01% unavailable. That permitted 0.01% unavailability is the service's error budget. We can spend the budget on anything we want, as long as we don't overspend it.
So how do we want to spend the error budget? The development team wants to launch features and attract new users. Ideally, we would spend all of our error budget taking risks with things we launch in order to launch them quickly. This basic premise describes the whole model of error budgets. As soon as SRE activities are conceptualized in this framework, freeing up the error budget through tactics such as phased rollouts and 1% experiments can optimize for quicker launches.
The use of an error budget resolves the structural conflict of incentives between development and SRE. SRE's goal is no longer "zero outages"; rather, SREs and product developers aim to spend the error budget getting maximum feature velocity. This change makes all the difference. An outage is no longer a "bad" thing-it is an expected part of the process of innovation, and an occurrence that both development and SRE teams manage rather than fear.

Monitoring

Monitoring is one of the primary means by which service owners keep track of a system's health and availability. As such, monitoring strategy should be constructed thoughtfully. A classic and common approach to monitoring is to watch for a specific value or condition, and then to trigger an email alert when that value is exceeded or that condition occurs. However, this type of email alerting is not an effective solution: a system that requires a human to read an email and decide whether or not some type of action needs to be taken in response is fundamentally flawed. Monitoring should never require a human to interpret any part of the alerting domain. Instead, software should do the interpreting, and humans should be notified only when they need to take action.
There are three kinds of valid monitoring output:

Alerts

Signify that a human needs to take action immediately in response to

something that is either happening or about to happen, in order to improve the situation.
Tickets

Signify that a human needs to take action, but not immediately. The system cannot automatically handle the situation, but if a human takes action in a few days, no damage will result.
Logging

No one needs to look at this information, but it is recorded for diagnostic or forensic purposes. The expectation is that no one reads logs unless something else prompts them to do so.

Emergency Response

Reliability is a function of mean time to failure (MTTF) and mean time to repair (MTTR) [Sch15]. The most relevant metric in evaluating the effectiveness of emergency response is how quickly the response team can bring the system back to health-that is, the MTTR.
Humans add latency. Even if a given system experiences more actual failures, a system that can avoid emergencies that require human intervention will have higher availability than a system that requires hands-on intervention. When humans are necessary, we have found that thinking through and recording the best practices ahead of time in a "playbook" produces roughly a 3x improvement in MTTR as compared to the strategy of "winging it." The hero jack-of-all-trades on-call engineer does work, but the practiced on-call engineer armed with a playbook works much better. While no playbook, no matter how comprehensive it may be, is a substitute for smart engineers able to think on the fly, clear and thorough troubleshooting steps and tips are valuable when responding to a high- stakes or time-sensitive page. Thus, Google SRE relies on on-call playbooks, in
addition to exercises such as the "Wheel of Misfortune,"7 to prepare engineers to react to on-call events.

Change Management

SRE has found that roughly 70% of outages are due to changes in a live system.

Best practices in this domain use automation to accomplish the following:

Implementing progressive rollouts Quickly and accurately detecting problems
Rolling back changes safely when problems arise

This trio of practices effectively minimizes the aggregate number of users and operations exposed to bad changes. By removing humans from the loop, these practices avoid the normal problems of fatigue, familiarity/contempt, and inattention to highly repetitive tasks. As a result, both release velocity and safety increase.

Demand Forecasting and Capacity Planning

Demand forecasting and capacity planning can be viewed as ensuring that there is sufficient capacity and redundancy to serve projected future demand with the required availability. There's nothing particularly special about these concepts, except that a surprising number of services and teams don't take the steps necessary to ensure that the required capacity is in place by the time it is needed. Capacity planning should take both organic growth (which stems from natural product adoption and usage by customers) and inorganic growth (which results from events like feature launches, marketing campaigns, or other business- driven changes) into account.
Several steps are mandatory in capacity planning:

An accurate organic demand forecast, which extends beyond the lead time required for acquiring capacity
An accurate incorporation of inorganic demand sources into the demand forecast
Regular load testing of the system to correlate raw capacity(servers, disks, and so on) to service capacity
Because capacity is critical to availability, it naturally follows that the SRE team must be in charge of capacity planning, which means they also must be in charge of provisioning.

Provisioning

Provisioning combines both change management and capacity planning. In our experience, provisioning must be conducted quickly and only when necessary, as capacity is expensive. This exercise must also be done correctly or capacity doesn't work when needed. Adding new capacity often involves spinning up a new instance or location, making significant modification to existing systems (configuration files, load balancers, networking), and validating that the new capacity performs and delivers correct results. Thus, it is a riskier operation than load shifting, which is often done multiple times per hour, and must be treated with a corresponding degree of extra caution.

Efficiency and Performance

Efficient use of resources is important any time a service cares about money. Because SRE ultimately controls provisioning, it must also be involved in any work on utilization, as utilization is a function of how a given service works and how it is provisioned. It follows that paying close attention to the provisioning strategy for a service, and therefore its utilization, provides a very, very big lever on the service's total costs.
Resource use is a function of demand (load), capacity, and software efficiency. SREs predict demand, provision capacity, and can modify the software. These three factors are a large part (though not the entirety) of a service's efficiency.
Software systems become slower as load is added to them. A slowdown in a service equates to a loss of capacity. At some point, a slowing system stops serving, which corresponds to infinite slowness. SREs provision to meet a capacity target at a specific response speed, and thus are keenly interested in a service's performance. SREs and product developers will (and should) monitor and modify a service to improve its performance, thus adding capacity and
improving efficiency.8

The End of the Beginning
Site Reliability Engineering represents a significant break from existing industry best practices for managing large, complicated services. Motivated originally by familiarity-"as a software engineer, this is how I would want to invest my time to accomplish a set of repetitive tasks"-it has become much more: a set of principles, a set of practices, a set of incentives, and a field of endeavor within

the larger software engineering discipline. The rest of the book explores the SRE Way in detail.

6Vice President, Google Engineering, founder of Google SRE
7See Disaster Role Playing.
8For further discussion of how this collaboration can work in practice, see Communications: Production Meetings.

Chapter 2 - The Production Environment at Google, from the Viewpoint of an SRE
Written by JC van WinkelEdited by Betsy Beyer

Google datacenters are very different from most conventional datacenters and small-scale server farms. These differences present both extra problems and opportunities. This chapter discusses the challenges and opportunities that characterize Google datacenters and introduces terminology that is used throughout the book.

Hardware
Most of Google's compute resources are in Google-designed datacenters with proprietary power distribution, cooling, networking, and compute hardware (see [Bar13]). Unlike "standard" colocation datacenters, the compute hardware in a Google-designed datacenter is the same across the board.9 To eliminate the
confusion between server hardware and server software, we use the following terminology throughout the book:
Machine

    A piece of hardware (or perhaps a VM) Server
A piece of software that implements a service

Machines can run any server, so we don't dedicate specific machines to specific server programs. There's no specific machine that runs our mail server, for example. Instead, resource allocation is handled by our cluster operating system, Borg.

We realize this use of the word server is unusual. The common use of the word conflates "binary that accepts network connection" with machine, but differentiating between the two is important when talking about computing at Google. Once you get used to our usage of server, it becomes more apparent why it makes sense to use this specialized terminology, not just within Google but also in the rest of this book.
Figure 2-1 illustrates the topology of a Google datacenter: Tens of machines are placed in a rack.
Racks stand in a row.
One or more rows form a cluster.
Usually a datacenter building houses multiple clusters.
Multiple datacenter buildings that are located close together form a campus.

Figure 2-1. Example Google datacenter campus topology

Machines within a given datacenter need to be able to talk with each other, so we created a very fast virtual switch with tens of thousands of ports. We accomplished this by connecting hundreds of Google-built switches in a Clos network fabric [Clos53] named Jupiter [Sin15]. In its largest configuration, Jupiter supports 1.3 Pbps bisection bandwidth among servers.
Datacenters are connected to each other with our globe-spanning backbone

network B4 [Jai13]. B4 is a software-defined networking architecture (and uses the OpenFlow open-standard communications protocol). It supplies massive bandwidth to a modest number of sites, and uses elastic bandwidth allocation to maximize average bandwidth [Kum15].

System Software That "Organizes" the Hardware
Our hardware must be controlled and administered by software that can handle massive scale. Hardware failures are one notable problem that we manage with software. Given the large number of hardware components in a cluster, hardware failures occur quite frequently. In a single cluster in a typical year, thousands of machines fail and thousands of hard disks break; when multiplied by the number of clusters we operate globally, these numbers become somewhat breathtaking. Therefore, we want to abstract such problems away from users, and the teams running our services similarly don't want to be bothered by hardware failures. Each datacenter campus has teams dedicated to maintaining the hardware and datacenter infrastructure.

Managing Machines

Borg, illustrated in Figure 2-2, is a distributed cluster operating system [Ver15], similar to Apache Mesos.10 Borg manages its jobs at the cluster level.


Figure 2-2. High-level Borg cluster architecture

Borg is responsible for running users' jobs, which can either be indefinitely running servers or batch processes like a MapReduce [Dea04]. Jobs can consist of more than one (and sometimes thousands) of identical tasks, both for reasons of reliability and because a single process can't usually handle all cluster traffic. When Borg starts a job, it finds machines for the tasks and tells the machines to start the server program. Borg then continually monitors these tasks. If a task malfunctions, it is killed and restarted, possibly on a different machine.
Because tasks are fluidly allocated over machines, we can't simply rely on IP addresses and port numbers to refer to the tasks. We solve this problem with an extra level of indirection: when starting a job, Borg allocates a name and index number to each task using the Borg Naming Service (BNS). Rather than using the IP address and port number, other processes connect to Borg tasks via the BNS name, which is translated to an IP address and port number by BNS. For example, the BNS path might be a string such as /bns/<cluster>/<user>/<job name>/<task number>, which would resolve to <IP address>:<port>.

Borg is also responsible for the allocation of resources to jobs. Every job needs to specify its required resources (e.g., 3 CPU cores, 2 GiB of RAM). Using the

list of requirements for all jobs, Borg can binpack the tasks over the machines in an optimal way that also accounts for failure domains (for example: Borg won't run all of a job's tasks on the same rack, as doing so means that the top of rack switch is a single point of failure for that job).
If a task tries to use more resources than it requested, Borg kills the task and restarts it (as a slowly crashlooping task is usually preferable to a task that hasn't been restarted at all).

Storage

Tasks can use the local disk on machines as a scratch pad, but we have several cluster storage options for permanent storage (and even scratch space will eventually move to the cluster storage model). These are comparable to Lustre and the Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS), which are both open source cluster filesystems.
The storage layer is responsible for offering users easy and reliable access to the storage available for a cluster. As shown in Figure 2-3, storage has many layers:
1. The lowest layer is called D (for disk, although D uses both spinning disks and flash storage). D is a fileserver running on almost all machines in a cluster. However, users who want to access their data don't want to have to remember which machine is storing their data, which is where the next layer comes into play.
2. A layer on top of D called Colossus creates a cluster-wide filesystem that offers usual filesystem semantics, as well as replication and encryption. Colossus is the successor to GFS, the Google File System [Ghe03].
3. There are several database-like services built on top of Colossus:

1. Bigtable [Cha06] is a NoSQL database system that can handle databases that are petabytes in size. A Bigtable is a sparse, distributed, persistent multidimensional sorted map that is indexed by row key, column key, and timestamp; each value in the map is an uninterpreted array of bytes. Bigtable supports eventually consistent, cross- datacenter replication.
2. Spanner [Cor12] offers an SQL-like interface for users that require real consistency across the world.

3. Several other database systems, such as Blobstore, are available. Each of these options comes with its own set of trade-offs (see Data Integrity: What You Read Is What You Wrote).


Figure 2-3. Portions of the Google storage stack

Networking

Google's network hardware is controlled in several ways. As discussed earlier, we use an OpenFlow-based software-defined network. Instead of using "smart" routing hardware, we rely on less expensive "dumb" switching components in combination with a central (duplicated) controller that precomputes best paths across the network. Therefore, we're able to move compute-expensive routing decisions away from the routers and use simple switching hardware.

Network bandwidth needs to be allocated wisely. Just as Borg limits the compute resources that a task can use, the Bandwidth Enforcer (BwE) manages the available bandwidth to maximize the average available bandwidth. Optimizing bandwidth isn't just about cost: centralized traffic engineering has been shown to solve a number of problems that are traditionally extremely difficult to solve through a combination of distributed routing and traffic engineering [Kum15].
Some services have jobs running in multiple clusters, which are distributed across the world. In order to minimize latency for globally distributed services, we want to direct users to the closest datacenter with available capacity. Our Global Software Load Balancer (GSLB) performs load balancing on three levels:
Geographic	load	balancing	for	DNS	requests	(for	example,	to
www.google.com), described in Load Balancing at the Frontend
Load balancing at a user service level (for example, YouTube or Google Maps)
Load balancing at the Remote Procedure Call (RPC) level, described in Load Balancing in the Datacenter
Service owners specify a symbolic name for a service, a list of BNS addresses of servers, and the capacity available at each of the locations (typically measured in queries per second). GSLB then directs traffic to the BNS addresses.

Other System Software
Several other components in a datacenter are also important.

Lock Service

The Chubby [Bur06] lock service provides a filesystem-like API for maintaining locks. Chubby handles these locks across datacenter locations. It uses the Paxos protocol for asynchronous Consensus (see Managing Critical State: Distributed Consensus for Reliability).
Chubby also plays an important role in master election. When a service has five replicas of a job running for reliability purposes but only one replica may perform actual work, Chubby is used to select which replica may proceed.

Data that must be consistent is well suited to storage in Chubby. For this reason, BNS uses Chubby to store mapping between BNS paths and IP address:port pairs.

Monitoring and Alerting

We want to make sure that all services are running as required. Therefore, we run many instances of our Borgmon monitoring program (see Practical Alerting from Time-Series Data). Borgmon regularly "scrapes" metrics from monitored servers. These metrics can be used instantaneously for alerting and also stored for use in historic overviews (e.g., graphs). We can use monitoring in several ways:
Set up alerting for acute problems.
Compare behavior: did a software update make the server faster?
Examine how resource consumption behavior evolves over time, which is essential for capacity planning.

Our Software Infrastructure
Our software architecture is designed to make the most efficient use of our hardware infrastructure. Our code is heavily multithreaded, so one task can easily use many cores. To facilitate dashboards, monitoring, and debugging, every server has an HTTP server that provides diagnostics and statistics for a given task.
All of Google's services communicate using a Remote Procedure Call (RPC) infrastructure named Stubby; an open source version, gRPC, is available.11 Often, an RPC call is made even when a call to a subroutine in the local program needs to be performed. This makes it easier to refactor the call into a different
server if more modularity is needed, or when a server's codebase grows. GSLB can load balance RPCs in the same way it load balances externally visible services.
A server receives RPC requests from its frontend and sends RPCs to its backend. In traditional terms, the frontend is called the client and the backend is called the server.

Data is transferred to and from an RPC using protocol buffers,12 often abbreviated to "protobufs," which are similar to Apache's Thrift. Protocol buffers have many advantages over XML for serializing structured data: they are simpler to use, 3 to 10 times smaller, 20 to 100 times faster, and less ambiguous.

Our Development Environment
Development velocity is very important to Google, so we've built a complete development environment to make use of our infrastructure [Mor12b].
Apart from a few groups that have their own open source repositories (e.g., Android and Chrome), Google Software Engineers work from a single shared repository [Pot16]. This has a few important practical implications for our workflows:
If engineers encounter a problem in a component outside of their project, they can fix the problem, send the proposed changes ("changelist," or CL) to the owner for review, and submit the CL to the mainline.
Changes to source code in an engineer's own project require a review. All software is reviewed before being submitted.
When software is built, the build request is sent to build servers in a datacenter. Even large builds are executed quickly, as many build servers can compile in parallel. This infrastructure is also used for continuous testing. Each time a CL is submitted, tests run on all software that may depend on that CL, either directly or indirectly. If the framework determines that the change likely broke other parts in the system, it notifies the owner of the submitted change. Some projects use a push-on-green system, where a new version is automatically pushed to production after passing tests.

Shakespeare: A Sample Service
To provide a model of how a service would hypothetically be deployed in the Google production environment, let's look at an example service that interacts with multiple Google technologies. Suppose we want to offer a service that lets you determine where a given word is used throughout all of Shakespeare's works.

We can divide this system into two parts:

A batch component that reads all of Shakespeare's texts, creates an index, and writes the index into a Bigtable. This job need only run once, or perhaps very infrequently (as you never know if a new text might be discovered!).
An application frontend that handles end-user requests. This job is always up, as users in all time zones will want to search in Shakespeare's books.
The batch component is a MapReduce comprising three phases.

The mapping phase reads Shakespeare's texts and splits them into individual words. This is faster if performed in parallel by multiple workers.
The shuffle phase sorts the tuples by word.

In the reduce phase, a tuple of (word, list of locations) is created. Each tuple is written to a row in a Bigtable, using the word as the key. Life of a Request
Figure 2-4 shows how a user's request is serviced: first, the user points their
browser to shakespeare.google.com. To obtain the corresponding IP address, the user's device resolves the address with its DNS server (1). This request ultimately ends up at Google's DNS server, which talks to GSLB. As GSLB keeps track of traffic load among frontend servers across regions, it picks which server IP address to send to this user.


Figure 2-4. The life of a request

The browser connects to the HTTP server on this IP. This server (named the Google Frontend, or GFE) is a reverse proxy that terminates the TCP connection
(2). The GFE looks up which service is required (web search, maps, or-in this case-Shakespeare). Again using GSLB, the server finds an available Shakespeare frontend server, and sends that server an RPC containing the HTTP request (3).
The Shakespeare server analyzes the HTTP request and constructs a protobuf containing the word to look up. The Shakespeare frontend server now needs to contact the Shakespeare backend server: the frontend server contacts GSLB to obtain the BNS address of a suitable and unloaded backend server (4). That Shakespeare backend server now contacts a Bigtable server to obtain the requested data (5).
The answer is written to the reply protobuf and returned to the Shakespeare backend server. The backend hands a protobuf containing the results to the

Shakespeare frontend server, which assembles the HTML and returns the answer to the user.
This entire chain of events is executed in the blink of an eye-just a few hundred milliseconds! Because many moving parts are involved, there are many potential points of failure; in particular, a failing GSLB would wreak havoc. However, Google's policies of rigorous testing and careful rollout, in addition to our proactive error recovery methods such as graceful degradation, allow us to deliver the reliable service that our users have come to expect. After all, people regularly use www.google.com to check if their Internet connection is set up correctly.

Job and Data Organization

Load testing determined that our backend server can handle about 100 queries per second (QPS). Trials performed with a limited set of users lead us to expect a peak load of about 3,470 QPS, so we need at least 35 tasks. However, the following considerations mean that we need at least 37 tasks in the job, or N+2:
During updates, one task at a time will be unavailable, leaving 36 tasks.
A machine failure might occur during a task update, leaving only 35 tasks, just enough to serve peak load.13
A closer examination of user traffic shows our peak usage is distributed globally: 1,430 QPS from North America, 290 from South America, 1,400 from Europe and Africa, and 350 from Asia and Australia. Instead of locating all backends at one site, we distribute them across the USA, South America, Europe, and Asia. Allowing for N+2 redundancy per region means that we end up with 17 tasks in the USA, 16 in Europe, and 6 in Asia. However, we decide to use 4 tasks (instead of 5) in South America, to lower the overhead of N+2 to N+1. In this case, we're willing to tolerate a small risk of higher latency in exchange for lower hardware costs: if GSLB redirects traffic from one continent to another when our South American datacenter is over capacity, we can save 20% of the resources we'd spend on hardware. In the larger regions, we'll spread tasks across two or three clusters for extra resiliency.
Because the backends need to contact the Bigtable holding the data, we need to also design this storage element strategically. A backend in Asia contacting a Bigtable in the USA adds a significant amount of latency, so we replicate the

Bigtable in each region. Bigtable replication helps us in two ways: it provides resilience should a Bigtable server fail, and it lowers data-access latency. While Bigtable only offers eventual consistency, it isn't a major problem because we don't need to update the contents often.
We've introduced a lot of terminology here; while you don't need to remember it all, it's useful for framing many of the other systems we'll refer to later.

9Well, roughly the same. Mostly. Except for the stuff that is different. Some datacenters end up with multiple generations of compute hardware, and sometimes we augment datacenters after they are built. But for the most part, our datacenter hardware is homogeneous.

10Some readers may be more familiar with Borg's descendant, Kubernetes-an open source Container Cluster orchestration framework started by Google in 2014; see http://kubernetes.io and [Bur16]. For more details on the similarities between Borg and Apache Mesos, see [Ver15].

11See http://grpc.io.
12Protocol buffers are a language-neutral, platform-neutral extensible mechanism for serializing structured data. For more details, see https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/.

13We assume the probability of two simultaneous task failures in our environment is low enough to be negligible. Single points of failure, such as top- of-rack switches or power distribution, may make this assumption invalid in other environments.

Part II - Principles
This section examines the principles underlying how SRE teams typically work
-the patterns, behaviors, and areas of concern that influence the general domain of SRE operations.
The first chapter in this section, and the most important piece to read if you want to attain the widest-angle picture of what exactly SRE does, and how we reason about it, is Embracing Risk. It looks at SRE through the lens of risk-its assessment, management, and the use of error budgets to provide usefully neutral approaches to service management.
Service level objectives are another foundational conceptual unit for SRE. The industry commonly lumps disparate concepts under the general banner of service level agreements, a tendency that makes it harder to think about these concepts clearly. Service Level Objectives attempts to disentangle indicators from objectives from agreements, examines how SRE uses each of these terms, and provides some recommendations on how to find useful metrics for your own applications.
Eliminating toil is one of SRE's most important tasks, and is the subject of Eliminating Toil. We define toil as mundane, repetitive operational work providing no enduring value, which scales linearly with service growth.
Whether it is at Google or elsewhere, monitoring is an absolutely essential component of doing the right thing in production. If you can't monitor a service, you don't know what's happening, and if you're blind to what's happening, you can't be reliable. Read Monitoring Distributed Systems, for some recommendations for what and how to monitor, and some implementation- agnostic best practices.
In The Evolution of Automation at Google, we examine SRE's approach to automation, and walk through some case studies of how SRE has implemented automation, both successfully and unsuccessfully.
Most companies treat release engineering as an afterthought. However, as you'll learn in Release Engineering, release engineering is not just critical to overall

system stability-as most outages result from pushing a change of some kind. It is also the best way to ensure that releases are consistent.
A key principle of any effective software engineering, not only reliability- oriented engineering, simplicity is a quality that, once lost, can be extraordinarily difficult to recapture. Nevertheless, as the old adage goes, a complex system that works necessarily evolved from a simple system that works. Simplicity, goes into this topic in detail.

Further Reading from Google SRE

Increasing product velocity safely is a core principle for any organization. In "Making Push On Green a Reality" [Kle14], published in October 2014, we show that taking humans out of the release process can paradoxically reduce SREs' toil while increasing system reliability.

Chapter 3 - Embracing Risk
Written by Marc Alvidrez Edited by Kavita Guliani
You might expect Google to try to build 100% reliable services-ones that never fail. It turns out that past a certain point, however, increasing reliability is worse for a service (and its users) rather than better! Extreme reliability comes at a cost: maximizing stability limits how fast new features can be developed and how quickly products can be delivered to users, and dramatically increases their cost, which in turn reduces the numbers of features a team can afford to offer. Further, users typically don't notice the difference between high reliability and extreme reliability in a service, because the user experience is dominated by less reliable components like the cellular network or the device they are working with. Put simply, a user on a 99% reliable smartphone cannot tell the difference between 99.99% and 99.999% service reliability! With this in mind, rather than simply maximizing uptime, Site Reliability Engineering seeks to balance the risk of unavailability with the goals of rapid innovation and efficient service operations, so that users' overall happiness-with features, service, and performance-is optimized.

Managing Risk
Unreliable systems can quickly erode users' confidence, so we want to reduce the chance of system failure. However, experience shows that as we build systems, cost does not increase linearly as reliability increments-an incremental improvement in reliability may cost 100x more than the previous increment. The costliness has two dimensions:
The cost of redundant machine/compute resources

The cost associated with redundant equipment that, for example, allows us to take systems offline for routine or unforeseen maintenance, or provides space for us to store parity code blocks that provide a minimum data durability guarantee.

The opportunity cost

The cost borne by an organization when it allocates engineering resources to build systems or features that diminish risk instead of features that are directly visible to or usable by end users. These engineers no longer work on new features and products for end users.
In SRE, we manage service reliability largely by managing risk. We conceptualize risk as a continuum. We give equal importance to figuring out how to engineer greater reliability into Google systems and identifying the appropriate level of tolerance for the services we run. Doing so allows us to perform a cost/benefit analysis to determine, for example, where on the (nonlinear) risk continuum we should place Search, Ads, Gmail, or Photos. Our goal is to explicitly align the risk taken by a given service with the risk the business is willing to bear. We strive to make a service reliable enough, but no more reliable than it needs to be. That is, when we set an availability target of 99.99%,we want to exceed it, but not by much: that would waste opportunities to add features to the system, clean up technical debt, or reduce its operational costs. In a sense, we view the availability target as both a minimum and a maximum. The key advantage of this framing is that it unlocks explicit, thoughtful risktaking.

Measuring Service Risk
As standard practice at Google, we are often best served by identifying an objective metric to represent the property of a system we want to optimize. By setting a target, we can assess our current performance and track improvements or degradations over time. For service risk, it is not immediately clear how to reduce all of the potential factors into a single metric. Service failures can have many potential effects, including user dissatisfaction, harm, or loss of trust; direct or indirect revenue loss; brand or reputational impact; and undesirable press coverage. Clearly, some of these factors are very hard to measure. To make this problem tractable and consistent across many types of systems we run, we focus on unplanned downtime.
For most services, the most straightforward way of representing risk tolerance is in terms of the acceptable level of unplanned downtime. Unplanned downtime is captured by the desired level of service availability, usually expressed in terms of the number of "nines" we would like to provide: 99.9%, 99.99%, or 99.999%

availability. Each additional nine corresponds to an order of magnitude improvement toward 100% availability. For serving systems, this metric is traditionally calculated based on the proportion of system uptime (see Time- based availability).

Time-based availability



Using this formula over the period of a year, we can calculate the acceptable number of minutes of downtime to reach a given number of nines of availability. For example, a system with an availability target of 99.99% can be down for up to 52.56 minutes in a year and stay within its availability target; see Availability Table for a table.
At Google, however, a time-based metric for availability is usually not meaningful because we are looking across globally distributed services. Our approach to fault isolation makes it very likely that we are serving at least a subset of traffic for a given service somewhere in the world at any given time (i.e., we are at least partially "up" at all times). Therefore, instead of using metrics around uptime, we define availability in terms of the request success rate. Aggregate availability shows how this yield-based metric is calculated over a rolling window (i.e., proportion of successful requests over a one-day window).

Aggregate availability



For example, a system that serves 2.5M requests in a day with a daily availability target of 99.99% can serve up to 250 errors and still hit its target for that given day.
In a typical application, not all requests are equal: failing a new user sign-up request is different from failing a request polling for new email in the background. In many cases, however, availability calculated as the request success rate over all requests is a reasonable approximation of unplanned

downtime, as viewed from the end-user perspective.

Quantifying unplanned downtime as a request success rate also makes this availability metric more amenable for use in systems that do not typically serve end users directly. Most nonserving systems (e.g., batch, pipeline, storage, and transactional systems) have a well-defined notion of successful and unsuccessful units of work. Indeed, while the systems discussed in this chapter are primarily consumer and infrastructure serving systems, many of the same principles also apply to nonserving systems with minimal modification.
For example, a batch process that extracts, transforms, and inserts the contents of one of our customer databases into a data warehouse to enable further analysis may be set to run periodically. Using a request success rate defined in terms of records successfully and unsuccessfully processed, we can calculate a useful availability metric despite the fact that the batch system does not run constantly.
Most often, we set quarterly availability targets for a service and track our performance against those targets on a weekly, or even daily, basis. This strategy lets us manage the service to a high-level availability objective by looking for, tracking down, and fixing meaningful deviations as they inevitably arise. See Service Level Objectives for more details.

Risk Tolerance of Services
What does it mean to identify the risk tolerance of a service? In a formal environment or in the case of safety-critical systems, the risk tolerance of services is typically built directly into the basic product or service definition. At Google, services' risk tolerance tends to be less clearly defined.
To identify the risk tolerance of a service, SREs must work with the product owners to turn a set of business goals into explicit objectives to which we can engineer. In this case, the business goals we're concerned about have a direct impact on the performance and reliability of the service offered. In practice, this translation is easier said than done. While consumer services often have clear product owners, it is unusual for infrastructure services (e.g., storage systems or a general-purpose HTTP caching layer) to have a similar structure of product ownership. We'll discuss the consumer and infrastructure cases in turn.

Identifying the Risk Tolerance of Consumer Services

Our consumer services often have a product team that acts as the business owner for an application. For example, Search, Google Maps, and Google Docs each have their own product managers. These product managers are charged with understanding the users and the business, and for shaping the product for success in the marketplace. When a product team exists, that team is usually the best resource to discuss the reliability requirements for a service. In the absence of a dedicated product team, the engineers building the system often play this role either knowingly or unknowingly.
There are many factors to consider when assessing the risk tolerance of services, such as the following:
What level of availability is required?
Do different types of failures have different effects on the service?
How can we use the service cost to help locate a service on the risk continuum?
What other service metrics are important to take into account?

Target level of availability

The target level of availability for a given Google service usually depends on the function it provides and how the service is positioned in the marketplace. The following list includes issues to consider:
What level of service will the users expect?
Does this service tie directly to revenue (either our revenue, or our customers' revenue)?
Is this a paid service, or is it free?
If there are competitors in the marketplace, what level of service do those competitors provide?
Is this service targeted at consumers, or at enterprises?

Consider the requirements of Google Apps for Work. The majority of its users are enterprise users, some large and some small. These enterprises depend on Google Apps for Work services (e.g., Gmail, Calendar, Drive, Docs) to provide tools that enable their employees to perform their daily work. Stated another way, an outage for a Google Apps for Work service is an outage not only for Google, but also for all the enterprises that critically depend on us. For a typical Google Apps for Work service, we might set an external quarterly availability

target of 99.9%, and back this target with a stronger internal availability target and a contract that stipulates penalties if we fail to deliver to the external target.
YouTube provides a contrasting set of considerations. When Google acquired YouTube, we had to decide on the appropriate availability target for the website. In 2006, YouTube was focused on consumers and was in a very different phase of its business lifecycle than Google was at the time. While YouTube already had a great product, it was still changing and growing rapidly. We set a lower availability target for YouTube than for our enterprise products because rapid feature development was correspondingly more important.

Types of failures

The expected shape of failures for a given service is another important consideration. How resilient is our business to service downtime? Which is worse for the service: a constant low rate of failures, or an occasional full-site outage? Both types of failure may result in the same absolute number of errors, but may have vastly different impacts on the business.
An illustrative example of the difference between full and partial outages naturally arises in systems that serve private information. Consider a contact management application, and the difference between intermittent failures that cause profile pictures to fail to render, versus a failure case that results in a user's private contacts being shown to another user. The first case is clearly a poor user experience, and SREs would work to remediate the problem quickly. In the second case, however, the risk of exposing private data could easily undermine basic user trust in a significant way. As a result, taking down the service entirely would be appropriate during the debugging and potential clean- up phase for the second case.
At the other end of services offered by Google, it is sometimes acceptable to have regular outages during maintenance windows. A number of years ago, the Ads Frontend used to be one such service. It is used by advertisers and website publishers to set up, configure, run, and monitor their advertising campaigns. Because most of this work takes place during normal business hours, we determined that occasional, regular, scheduled outages in the form of maintenance windows would be acceptable, and we counted these scheduled outages as planned downtime, not unplanned downtime.

Cost

Cost is often the key factor in determining the appropriate availability target for a service. Ads is in a particularly good position to make this trade-off because request successes and failures can be directly translated into revenue gained or lost. In determining the availability target for each service, we ask questions such as:
If we were to build and operate these systems at one more nine of availability, what would our incremental increase in revenue be?
Does this additional revenue offset the cost of reaching that level of reliability?
To make this trade-off equation more concrete, consider the following cost/benefit for an example service where each request has equal value:
Proposed improvement in availability target: 99.9% ? 99.99% Proposed increase in availability: 0.09%
Service revenue: $1M
Value of improved availability: $1M * 0.0009 = $900

In this case, if the cost of improving availability by one nine is less than $900, it is worth the investment. If the cost is greater than $900, the costs will exceed the projected increase in revenue.
It may be harder to set these targets when we do not have a simple translation function between reliability and revenue. One useful strategy may be to consider the background error rate of ISPs on the Internet. If failures are being measured from the end-user perspective and it is possible to drive the error rate for the service below the background error rate, those errors will fall within the noise for a given user's Internet connection. While there are significant differences between ISPs and protocols (e.g., TCP versus UDP, IPv4 versus IPv6), we've measured the typical background error rate for ISPs as falling between 0.01% and 1%.

Other service metrics

Examining the risk tolerance of services in relation to metrics besides availability is often fruitful. Understanding which metrics are important and

which metrics aren't important provides us with degrees of freedom when attempting to take thoughtful risks.
Service latency for our Ads systems provides an illustrative example. When Google first launched Web Search, one of the service's key distinguishing features was speed. When we introduced AdWords, which displays advertisements next to search results, a key requirement of the system was that the ads should not slow down the search experience. This requirement has driven the engineering goals in each generation of AdWords systems and is treated as an invariant.
AdSense, Google's ads system that serves contextual ads in response to requests from JavaScript code that publishers insert into their websites, has a very different latency goal. The latency goal for AdSense is to avoid slowing down the rendering of the third-party page when inserting contextual ads. The specific latency target, then, is dependent on the speed at which a given publisher's page renders. This means that AdSense ads can generally be served hundreds of milliseconds slower than AdWords ads.
This looser serving latency requirement has allowed us to make many smart trade-offs in provisioning (i.e., determining the quantity and locations of serving resources we use), which save us substantial cost over naive provisioning. In other words, given the relative insensitivity of the AdSense service to moderate changes in latency performance, we are able to consolidate serving into fewer geographical locations, reducing our operational overhead.

Identifying the Risk Tolerance of Infrastructure Services

The requirements for building and running infrastructure components differ from the requirements for consumer products in a number of ways. A fundamental difference is that, by definition, infrastructure components have multiple clients, often with varying needs.

Target level of availability

Consider Bigtable [Cha06], a massive-scale distributed storage system for structured data. Some consumer services serve data directly from Bigtable in the path of a user request. Such services need low latency and high reliability. Other teams use Bigtable as a repository for data that they use to perform offline

analysis (e.g., MapReduce) on a regular basis. These teams tend to be more concerned about throughput than reliability. Risk tolerance for these two use cases is quite distinct.
One approach to meeting the needs of both use cases is to engineer all infrastructure services to be ultra-reliable. Given the fact that these infrastructure services also tend to aggregate huge amounts of resources, such an approach is usually far too expensive in practice. To understand the different needs of the different types of users, you can look at the desired state of the request queue for each type of Bigtable user.

Types of failures

The low-latency user wants Bigtable's request queues to be (almost always) empty so that the system can process each outstanding request immediately upon arrival. (Indeed, inefficient queuing is often a cause of high tail latency.) The user concerned with offline analysis is more interested in system throughput, so that user wants request queues to never be empty. To optimize for throughput, the Bigtable system should never need to idle while waiting for its next request.
As you can see, success and failure are antithetical for these sets of users. Success for the low-latency user is failure for the user concerned with offline analysis.

Cost

One way to satisfy these competing constraints in a cost-effective manner is to partition the infrastructure and offer it at multiple independent levels of service. In the Bigtable example, we can build two types of clusters: low-latency clusters and throughput clusters. The low-latency clusters are designed to be operated and used by services that need low latency and high reliability. To ensure short queue lengths and satisfy more stringent client isolation requirements, the Bigtable system can be provisioned with a substantial amount of slack capacity for reduced contention and increased redundancy. The throughput clusters, on the other hand, can be provisioned to run very hot and with less redundancy, optimizing throughput over latency. In practice, we are able to satisfy these relaxed needs at a much lower cost, perhaps as little as 10-50% of the cost of a low-latency cluster. Given Bigtable's massive scale, this cost savings becomes

significant very quickly.

The key strategy with regards to infrastructure is to deliver services with explicitly delineated levels of service, thus enabling the clients to make the right risk and cost trade-offs when building their systems. With explicitly delineated levels of service, the infrastructure providers can effectively externalize the difference in the cost it takes to provide service at a given level to clients. Exposing cost in this way motivates the clients to choose the level of service with the lowest cost that still meets their needs. For example, Google+ can decide to put data critical to enforcing user privacy in a high-availability, globally consistent datastore (e.g., a globally replicated SQL-like system like Spanner [Cor12]), while putting optional data (data that isn't critical, but that enhances the user experience) in a cheaper, less reliable, less fresh, and eventually consistent datastore (e.g., a NoSQL store with best-effort replication like Bigtable).
Note that we can run multiple classes of services using identical hardware and software. We can provide vastly different service guarantees by adjusting a variety of service characteristics, such as the quantities of resources, the degree of redundancy, the geographical provisioning constraints, and, critically, the infrastructure software configuration.

Example: Frontend infrastructure

To demonstrate that these risk-tolerance assessment principles do not just apply to storage infrastructure, let's look at another large class of service: Google's frontend infrastructure. The frontend infrastructure consists of reverse proxy and load balancing systems running close to the edge of our network. These are the systems that, among other things, serve as one endpoint of the connections from end users (e.g., terminate TCP from the user's browser). Given their critical role, we engineer these systems to deliver an extremely high level of reliability. While consumer services can often limit the visibility of unreliability in backends, these infrastructure systems are not so lucky. If a request never makes it to the application service frontend server, it is lost.
We've explored the ways to identify the risk tolerance of both consumer and infrastructure services. Now, we'll discuss using that tolerance level to manage unreliability via error budgets.

Motivation for Error Budgets14

Written by Mark Roth Edited by Carmela Quinito
Other chapters in this book discuss how tensions can arise between product development teams and SRE teams, given that they are generally evaluated on different metrics. Product development performance is largely evaluated on product velocity, which creates an incentive to push new code as quickly as possible. Meanwhile, SRE performance is (unsurprisingly) evaluated based upon reliability of a service, which implies an incentive to push back against a high rate of change. Information asymmetry between the two teams further amplifies this inherent tension. The product developers have more visibility into the time and effort involved in writing and releasing their code, while the SREs have more visibility into the service's reliability (and the state of production in general).
These tensions often reflect themselves in different opinions about the level of effort that should be put into engineering practices. The following list presents some typical tensions:
Software fault tolerance

How hardened do we make the software to unexpected events? Too little, and we have a brittle, unusable product. Too much, and we have a product no one wants to use (but that runs very stably).
Testing

Again, not enough testing and you have embarrassing outages, privacy data leaks, or a number of other press-worthy events. Too much testing, and you might lose your market.
Push frequency

Every push is risky. How much should we work on reducing that risk, versus doing other work?
Canary duration and size

It's a best practice to test a new release on some small subset of a typical workload, a practice often called canarying. How long do we wait, and how big is the canary?
Usually, preexisting teams have worked out some kind of informal balance between them as to where the risk/effort boundary lies. Unfortunately, one can rarely prove that this balance is optimal, rather than just a function of the negotiating skills of the engineers involved. Nor should such decisions be driven by politics, fear, or hope. (Indeed, Google SRE's unofficial motto is "Hope is not a strategy.") Instead, our goal is to define an objective metric, agreed upon by both sides, that can be used to guide the negotiations in a reproducible way. The more data-based the decision can be, the better.

Forming Your Error Budget

In order to base these decisions on objective data, the two teams jointly define a quarterly error budget based on the service's service level objective, or SLO (see Service Level Objectives). The error budget provides a clear, objective metric that determines how unreliable the service is allowed to be within a single quarter. This metric removes the politics from negotiations between the SREs and the product developers when deciding how much risk to allow.
Our practice is then as follows:

Product Management defines an SLO, which sets an expectation of how much uptime the service should have per quarter.
The actual uptime is measured by a neutral third party: our monitoring system.
The difference between these two numbers is the "budget" of how much "unreliability" is remaining for the quarter.
As long as the uptime measured is above the SLO-in other words, as long as there is error budget remaining-new releases can be pushed.
For example, imagine that a service's SLO is to successfully serve 99.999% of all queries per quarter. This means that the service's error budget is a failure rate of 0.001% for a given quarter. If a problem causes us to fail 0.0002% of the expected queries for the quarter, the problem spends 20% of the service's quarterly error budget.

Benefits

The main benefit of an error budget is that it provides a common incentive that allows both product development and SRE to focus on finding the right balance between innovation and reliability.
Many products use this control loop to manage release velocity: as long as the system's SLOs are met, releases can continue. If SLO violations occur frequently enough to expend the error budget, releases are temporarily halted while additional resources are invested in system testing and development to make the system more resilient, improve its performance, and so on. More subtle
and effective approaches are available than this simple on/off technique:15 for instance, slowing down releases or rolling them back when the SLO-violation error budget is close to being used up.
For example, if product development wants to skimp on testing or increase push velocity and SRE is resistant, the error budget guides the decision. When the budget is large, the product developers can take more risks. When the budget is nearly drained, the product developers themselves will push for more testing or slower push velocity, as they don't want to risk using up the budget and stall their launch. In effect, the product development team becomes self-policing. They know the budget and can manage their own risk. (Of course, this outcome relies on an SRE team having the authority to actually stop launches if the SLO is broken.)
What happens if a network outage or datacenter failure reduces the measured SLO? Such events also eat into the error budget. As a result, the number of new pushes may be reduced for the remainder of the quarter. The entire team supports this reduction because everyone shares the responsibility for uptime.
The budget also helps to highlight some of the costs of overly high reliability targets, in terms of both inflexibility and slow innovation. If the team is having trouble launching new features, they may elect to loosen the SLO (thus increasing the error budget) in order to increase innovation.

Key Insights

Managing service reliability is largely about managing risk, and managing risk can be costly.

100% is probably never the right reliability target: not only is it impossible to achieve, it's typically more reliability than a service's users want or notice. Match the profile of the service to the risk the business is willing to take.
An error budget aligns incentives and emphasizes joint ownership between SRE and product development. Error budgets make it easier to decide the rate of releases and to effectively defuse discussions about outages with stakeholders, and allows multiple teams to reach the same conclusion about production risk without rancor.

14An early version of this section appeared as an article in ;login: (August 2015, vol. 40, no. 4).

15Known	as	"bang/bang"	control-see	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bang- bang_control.

Chapter 4 - Service Level Objectives
Written by Chris Jones, John Wilkes, and Niall Murphy with Cody Smith Edited by Betsy Beyer
It's impossible to manage a service correctly, let alone well, without understanding which behaviors really matter for that service and how to measure and evaluate those behaviors. To this end, we would like to define and deliver a given level of service to our users, whether they use an internal API or a public product.
We use intuition, experience, and an understanding of what users want to define service level indicators (SLIs), objectives (SLOs), and agreements (SLAs). These measurements describe basic properties of metrics that matter, what values we want those metrics to have, and how we'll react if we can't provide the expected service. Ultimately, choosing appropriate metrics helps to drive the right action if something goes wrong, and also gives an SRE team confidence that a service is healthy.
This chapter describes the framework we use to wrestle with the problems of metric modeling, metric selection, and metric analysis. Much of this explanation would be quite abstract without an example, so we'll use the Shakespeare service outlined in Shakespeare: A Sample Service to illustrate our main points.

Service Level Terminology
Many readers are likely familiar with the concept of an SLA, but the terms SLI and SLO are also worth careful definition, because in common use, the term SLA is overloaded and has taken on a number of meanings depending on context. We prefer to separate those meanings for clarity.

Indicators

An SLI is a service level indicator-a carefully defined quantitative measure of some aspect of the level of service that is provided.

Most services consider request latency-how long it takes to return a response to a request-as a key SLI. Other common SLIs include the error rate, often expressed as a fraction of all requests received, and system throughput, typically measured in requests per second. The measurements are often aggregated: i.e., raw data is collected over a measurement window and then turned into a rate, average, or percentile.
Ideally, the SLI directly measures a service level of interest, but sometimes only a proxy is available because the desired measure may be hard to obtain or interpret. For example, client-side latency is often the more user-relevant metric, but it might only be possible to measure latency at the server.
Another kind of SLI important to SREs is availability, or the fraction of the time that a service is usable. It is often defined in terms of the fraction of well-formed requests that succeed, sometimes called yield. (Durability-the likelihood that data will be retained over a long period of time-is equally important for data storage systems.) Although 100% availability is impossible, near-100% availability is often readily achievable, and the industry commonly expresses high-availability values in terms of the number of "nines" in the availability percentage. For example, availabilities of 99% and 99.999% can be referred to as "2 nines" and "5 nines" availability, respectively, and the current published target for Google Compute Engine availability is "three and a half nines"- 99.95% availability.

Objectives

An SLO is a service level objective: a target value or range of values for a service level that is measured by an SLI. A natural structure for SLOs is thus SLI
= target, or lower bound = SLI = upper bound. For example, we might decide that we will return Shakespeare search results "quickly," adopting an SLO that our average search request latency should be less than 100 milliseconds.
Choosing an appropriate SLO is complex. To begin with, you don't always get to choose its value! For incoming HTTP requests from the outside world to your service, the queries per second (QPS) metric is essentially determined by the desires of your users, and you can't really set an SLO for that.
On the other hand, you can say that you want the average latency per request to be under 100 milliseconds, and setting such a goal could in turn motivate you to

write your frontend with low-latency behaviors of various kinds or to buy certain kinds of low-latency equipment. (100 milliseconds is obviously an arbitrary value, but in general lower latency numbers are good. There are excellent reasons to believe that fast is better than slow, and that user-experienced latency above certain values actually drives people away- see "Speed Matters" [Bru09] for more details.)
Again, this is more subtle than it might at first appear, in that those two SLIs- QPS and latency-might be connected behind the scenes: higher QPS often leads to larger latencies, and it's common for services to have a performance cliff beyond some load threshold.
Choosing and publishing SLOs to users sets expectations about how a service will perform. This strategy can reduce unfounded complaints to service owners about, for example, the service being slow. Without an explicit SLO, users often develop their own beliefs about desired performance, which may be unrelated to the beliefs held by the people designing and operating the service. This dynamic can lead to both over-reliance on the service, when users incorrectly believe that a service will be more available than it actually is (as happened with Chubby: see The Global Chubby Planned Outage), and under-reliance, when prospective users believe a system is flakier and less reliable than it actually is.

The Global Chubby Planned Outage


Written by Marc Alvidrez

Chubby [Bur06] is Google's lock service for loosely coupled distributed systems. In the global case, we distribute Chubby instances such that each replica is in a different geographical region. Over time, we found that the failures of the global instance of Chubby consistently generated service outages, many of which were visible to end users. As it turns out, true global Chubby outages are so infrequent that service owners began to add dependencies to Chubby assuming that it would never go down. Its high reliability provided a false sense of security because the services could not function appropriately when Chubby was unavailable, however rarely that occurred.
The solution to this Chubby scenario is interesting: SRE makes sure that global Chubby meets, but does not significantly exceed, its service level objective. In any given quarter, if a true failure has not dropped availability below the target, a

controlled outage will be synthesized by intentionally taking down the system. In this way, we are able to flush out unreasonable dependencies on Chubby shortly after they are added. Doing so forces service owners to reckon with the reality of distributed systems sooner rather than later.

Agreements

Finally, SLAs are service level agreements: an explicit or implicit contract with your users that includes consequences of meeting (or missing) the SLOs they contain. The consequences are most easily recognized when they are financial- a rebate or a penalty-but they can take other forms. An easy way to tell the difference between an SLO and an SLA is to ask "what happens if the SLOs aren't met?": if there is no explicit consequence, then you are almost certainly
looking at an SLO.16
SRE doesn't typically get involved in constructing SLAs, because SLAs are closely tied to business and product decisions. SRE does, however, get involved in helping to avoid triggering the consequences of missed SLOs. They can also help to define the SLIs: there obviously needs to be an objective way to measure the SLOs in the agreement, or disagreements will arise.
Google Search is an example of an important service that doesn't have an SLA for the public: we want everyone to use Search as fluidly and efficiently as possible, but we haven't signed a contract with the whole world. Even so, there are still consequences if Search isn't available-unavailability results in a hit to our reputation, as well as a drop in advertising revenue. Many other Google services, such as Google for Work, do have explicit SLAs with their users. Whether or not a particular service has an SLA, it's valuable to define SLIs and SLOs and use them to manage the service.
So much for the theory-now for the experience.

Indicators in Practice
Given that we've made the case for why choosing appropriate metrics to measure your service is important, how do you go about identifying what metrics are meaningful to your service or system?

What Do You and Your Users Care About?

You shouldn't use every metric you can track in your monitoring system as an SLI; an understanding of what your users want from the system will inform the judicious selection of a few indicators. Choosing too many indicators makes it hard to pay the right level of attention to the indicators that matter, while choosing too few may leave significant behaviors of your system unexamined. We typically find that a handful of representative indicators are enough to evaluate and reason about a system's health.
Services tend to fall into a few broad categories in terms of the SLIs they find relevant:
User-facing serving systems, such as the Shakespeare search frontends, generally care about availability, latency, and throughput. In other words: Could we respond to the request? How long did it take to respond? How many requests could be handled?
Storage systems often emphasize latency, availability, and durability. In other words: How long does it take to read or write data? Can we access the data on demand? Is the data still there when we need it? See Data Integrity: What You Read Is What You Wrote for an extended discussion of these issues.
Big data systems, such as data processing pipelines, tend to care about throughput and end-to-end latency. In other words: How much data is being processed? How long does it take the data to progress from ingestion to completion? (Some pipelines may also have targets for latency on individual processing stages.)
All systems should care about correctness: was the right answer returned, the right data retrieved, the right analysis done? Correctness is important to track as an indicator of system health, even though it's often a property of the data in the system rather than the infrastructure per se, and so usually not an SRE responsibility to meet.

Collecting Indicators

Many indicator metrics are most naturally gathered on the server side, using a monitoring system such as Borgmon (see Practical Alerting from Time-Series

Data) or Prometheus, or with periodic log analysis-for instance, HTTP 500 responses as a fraction of all requests. However, some systems should be instrumented with client-side collection, because not measuring behavior at the client can miss a range of problems that affect users but don't affect server-side metrics. For example, concentrating on the response latency of the Shakespeare search backend might miss poor user latency due to problems with the page's JavaScript: in this case, measuring how long it takes for a page to become usable in the browser is a better proxy for what the user actually experiences.

Aggregation

For simplicity and usability, we often aggregate raw measurements. This needs to be done carefully.
Some metrics are seemingly straightforward, like the number of requests per second served, but even this apparently straightforward measurement implicitly aggregates data over the measurement window. Is the measurement obtained once a second, or by averaging requests over a minute? The latter may hide much higher instantaneous request rates in bursts that last for only a few seconds. Consider a system that serves 200 requests/s in even-numbered seconds, and 0 in the others. It has the same average load as one that serves a constant 100 requests/s, but has an instantaneous load that is twice as large as the average one. Similarly, averaging request latencies may seem attractive, but obscures an important detail: it's entirely possible for most of the requests to be fast, but for a long tail of requests to be much, much slower.
Most metrics are better thought of as distributions rather than averages. For example, for a latency SLI, some requests will be serviced quickly, while others will invariably take longer-sometimes much longer. A simple average can obscure these tail latencies, as well as changes in them. Figure 4-1 provides an example: although a typical request is served in about 50 ms, 5% of requests are 20 times slower! Monitoring and alerting based only on the average latency would show no change in behavior over the course of the day, when there are in fact significant changes in the tail latency (the topmost line).


Figure 4-1. 50th, 85th, 95th, and 99th percentile latencies for a system. Note that the Y-axis has a logarithmic scale.
Using percentiles for indicators allows you to consider the shape of the distribution and its differing attributes: a high-order percentile, such as the 99th or 99.9th, shows you a plausible worst-case value, while using the 50th percentile (also known as the median) emphasizes the typical case. The higher the variance in response times, the more the typical user experience is affected by long-tail behavior, an effect exacerbated at high load by queuing effects. User studies have shown that people typically prefer a slightly slower system to one with high variance in response time, so some SRE teams focus only on high percentile values, on the grounds that if the 99.9th percentile behavior is good, then the typical experience is certainly going to be.

A Note on Statistical Fallacies


We generally prefer to work with percentiles rather than the mean (arithmetic average) of a set of values. Doing so makes it possible to consider the long tail of data points, which often have significantly different (and more interesting) characteristics than the average. Because of the artificial nature of computing systems, data points are often skewed-for instance, no request can have a response in less than 0 ms, and a timeout at 1,000 ms means that there can be no successful responses with values greater than the timeout. As a result, we cannot assume that the mean and the median are the same-or even close to each other!
We try not to assume that our data is normally distributed without verifying it first, in case some standard intuitions and approximations don't hold. For example, if the distribution is not what's expected, a process that takes action

when it sees outliers (e.g., restarting a server with high request latencies) may do this too often, or not often enough.

Standardize Indicators

We recommend that you standardize on common definitions for SLIs so that you don't have to reason about them from first principles each time. Any feature that conforms to the standard definition templates can be omitted from the specification of an individual SLI, e.g.:
Aggregation intervals: "Averaged over 1 minute" Aggregation regions: "All the tasks in a cluster"
How frequently measurements are made: "Every 10 seconds"
Which requests are included: "HTTP GETs from black-box monitoring jobs"
How the data is acquired: "Through our monitoring, measured at the server"
Data-access latency: "Time to last byte"

To save effort, build a set of reusable SLI templates for each common metric; these also make it simpler for everyone to understand what a specific SLI means.

Objectives in Practice
Start by thinking about (or finding out!) what your users care about, not what you can measure. Often, what your users care about is difficult or impossible to measure, so you'll end up approximating users' needs in some way. However, if you simply start with what's easy to measure, you'll end up with less useful SLOs. As a result, we've sometimes found that working from desired objectives backward to specific indicators works better than choosing indicators and then coming up with targets.

Defining Objectives

For maximum clarity, SLOs should specify how they're measured and the conditions under which they're valid. For instance, we might say the following (the second line is the same as the first, but relies on the SLI defaults of the previous section to remove redundancy):

99% (averaged over 1 minute) of Get RPC calls will complete in less than 100 ms (measured across all the backend servers).
99% of Get RPC calls will complete in less than 100 ms.

If the shape of the performance curves are important, then you can specify multiple SLO targets:
90% of Get RPC calls will complete in less than 1 ms. 99% of Get RPC calls will complete in less than 10 ms. 99.9% of Get RPC calls will complete in less than 100 ms.

If you have users with heterogeneous workloads such as a bulk processing pipeline that cares about throughput and an interactive client that cares about latency, it may be appropriate to define separate objectives for each class of workload:
95% of throughput clients' Set RPC calls will complete in < 1 s.
99% of latency clients' Set RPC calls with payloads < 1 kB will complete in < 10 ms.

It's both unrealistic and undesirable to insist that SLOs will be met 100% of the time: doing so can reduce the rate of innovation and deployment, require expensive, overly conservative solutions, or both. Instead, it is better to allow an error budget-a rate at which the SLOs can be missed-and track that on a daily or weekly basis. Upper management will probably want a monthly or quarterly assessment, too. (An error budget is just an SLO for meeting other SLOs!)
The SLO violation rate can be compared against the error budget (see Motivation for Error Budgets), with the gap used as an input to the process that decides when to roll out new releases.

Choosing Targets

Choosing targets (SLOs) is not a purely technical activity because of the product and business implications, which should be reflected in both the SLIs and SLOs (and maybe SLAs) that are selected. Similarly, it may be necessary to trade off certain product attributes against others within the constraints posed by staffing, time to market, hardware availability, and funding. While SRE should be part of this conversation, and advise on the risks and viability of different options,

we've learned a few lessons that can help make this a more productive discussion:
Don't pick a target based on current performance

While understanding the merits and limits of a system is essential, adopting values without reflection may lock you into supporting a system that requires heroic efforts to meet its targets, and that cannot be improved without significant redesign.
Keep it simple

Complicated aggregations in SLIs can obscure changes to system performance, and are also harder to reason about.
Avoid absolutes

While it's tempting to ask for a system that can scale its load "infinitely" without any latency increase and that is "always" available, this requirement is unrealistic. Even a system that approaches such ideals will probably take a long time to design and build, and will be expensive to operate-and probably turn out to be unnecessarily better than what users would be happy (or even delighted) to have.
Have as few SLOs as possible

Choose just enough SLOs to provide good coverage of your system's attributes. Defend the SLOs you pick: if you can't ever win a conversation about priorities by quoting a particular SLO, it's probably not worth having that SLO.17 However, not all product attributes are amenable to SLOs: it's
    hard to specify "user delight" with an SLO. Perfection can wait
You can always refine SLO definitions and targets over time as you learn about a system's behavior. It's better to start with a loose target that you tighten than to choose an overly strict target that has to be relaxed when you discover it's unattainable.
SLOs can-and should-be a major driver in prioritizing work for SREs and

product developers, because they reflect what users care about. A good SLO is a helpful, legitimate forcing function for a development team. But a poorly thought-out SLO can result in wasted work if a team uses heroic efforts to meet an overly aggressive SLO, or a bad product if the SLO is too lax. SLOs are a massive lever: use them wisely.

Control Measures

SLIs and SLOs are crucial elements in the control loops used to manage systems:
1. Monitor and measure the system's SLIs.
2. Compare the SLIs to the SLOs, and decide whether or not action is needed.
3. If action is needed, figure out what needs to happen in order to meet the target.
4. Take that action.

For example, if step 2 shows that request latency is increasing, and will miss the SLO in a few hours unless something is done, step 3 might include testing the hypothesis that the servers are CPU-bound, and deciding to add more of them to spread the load. Without the SLO, you wouldn't know whether (or when) to take action.

SLOs Set Expectations

Publishing SLOs sets expectations for system behavior. Users (and potential users) often want to know what they can expect from a service in order to understand whether it's appropriate for their use case. For instance, a team wanting to build a photo-sharing website might want to avoid using a service that promises very strong durability and low cost in exchange for slightly lower availability, though the same service might be a perfect fit for an archival records management system.
In order to set realistic expectations for your users, you might consider using one or both of the following tactics:
Keep a safety margin

Using a tighter internal SLO than the SLO advertised to users gives you

room to respond to chronic problems before they become visible externally. An SLO buffer also makes it possible to accommodate reimplementations that trade performance for other attributes, such as cost or ease of maintenance, without having to disappoint users.
Don't overachieve

Users build on the reality of what you offer, rather than what you say you'll supply, particularly for infrastructure services. If your service's actual performance is much better than its stated SLO, users will come to rely on its current performance. You can avoid over-dependence by deliberately taking the system offline occasionally (Google's Chubby service introduced
planned outages in response to being overly available),18 throttling some requests, or designing the system so that it isn't faster under light loads.
Understanding how well a system is meeting its expectations helps decide whether to invest in making the system faster, more available, and more resilient. Alternatively, if the service is doing fine, perhaps staff time should be spent on other priorities, such as paying off technical debt, adding new features, or introducing other products.

Agreements in Practice
Crafting an SLA requires business and legal teams to pick appropriate consequences and penalties for a breach. SRE's role is to help them understand the likelihood and difficulty of meeting the SLOs contained in the SLA. Much of the advice on SLO construction is also applicable for SLAs. It is wise to be conservative in what you advertise to users, as the broader the constituency, the harder it is to change or delete SLAs that prove to be unwise or difficult to work with.

16Most people really mean SLO when they say "SLA." One giveaway: if somebody talks about an "SLA violation," they are almost always talking about a missed SLO. A real SLA violation might trigger a court case for breach of contract.

17If you can't ever win a conversation about SLOs, it's probably not worth having an SRE team for the product.

18Failure injection [Ben12] serves a different purpose, but can also help set expectations.

Chapter 5 - Eliminating Toil
Written by Vivek Rau Edited by Betsy Beyer
If a human operator needs to touch your system during normal operations, you have a bug. The definition of normal changes as your systems grow.
Carla Geisser, Google SRE

In SRE, we want to spend time on long-term engineering project work instead of operational work. Because the term operational work may be misinterpreted, we use a specific word: toil.

Toil Defined
Toil is not just "work I don't like to do." It's also not simply equivalent to administrative chores or grungy work. Preferences as to what types of work are satisfying and enjoyable vary from person to person, and some people even enjoy manual, repetitive work. There are also administrative chores that have to get done, but should not be categorized as toil: this is overhead. Overhead is often work not directly tied to running a production service, and includes tasks
like team meetings, setting and grading goals,19 snippets,20 and HR paperwork. Grungy work can sometimes have long-term value, and in that case, it's not toil, either. Cleaning up the entire alerting configuration for your service and removing clutter may be grungy, but it's not toil.
So what is toil? Toil is the kind of work tied to running a production service that tends to be manual, repetitive, automatable, tactical, devoid of enduring value, and that scales linearly as a service grows. Not every task deemed toil has all these attributes, but the more closely work matches one or more of the following descriptions, the more likely it is to be toil:
Manual

This includes work such as manually running a script that automates some

task. Running a script may be quicker than manually executing each step in the script, but the hands-on time a human spends running that script (not the elapsed time) is still toil time.
Repetitive

If you're performing a task for the first time ever, or even the second time, this work is not toil. Toil is work you do over and over. If you're solving a novel problem or inventing a new solution, this work is not toil.
Automatable

If a machine could accomplish the task just as well as a human, or the need for the task could be designed away, that task is toil. If human judgment is essential for the task, there's a good chance it's not toil.21
Tactical

Toil is interrupt-driven and reactive, rather than strategy-driven and proactive. Handling pager alerts is toil. We may never be able to eliminate this type of work completely, but we have to continually work toward minimizing it.
No enduring value

If your service remains in the same state after you have finished a task, the task was probably toil. If the task produced a permanent improvement in your service, it probably wasn't toil, even if some amount of grunt work- such as digging into legacy code and configurations and straightening them out-was involved.
O(n) with service growth

If the work involved in a task scales up linearly with service size, traffic volume, or user count, that task is probably toil. An ideally managed and designed service can grow by at least one order of magnitude with zero additional work, other than some one-time efforts to add resources.

Why Less Toil Is Better

Our SRE organization has an advertised goal of keeping operational work (i.e., toil) below 50% of each SRE's time. At least 50% of each SRE's time should be spent on engineering project work that will either reduce future toil or add service features. Feature development typically focuses on improving reliability, performance, or utilization, which often reduces toil as a second-order effect.
We share this 50% goal because toil tends to expand if left unchecked and can quickly fill 100% of everyone's time. The work of reducing toil and scaling up services is the "Engineering" in Site Reliability Engineering. Engineering work is what enables the SRE organization to scale up sublinearly with service size and to manage services more efficiently than either a pure Dev team or a pure Ops team.
Furthermore, when we hire new SREs, we promise them that SRE is not a typical Ops organization, quoting the 50% rule just mentioned. We need to keep that promise by not allowing the SRE organization or any subteam within it to devolve into an Ops team.

Calculating Toil


If we seek to cap the time an SRE spends on toil to 50%, how is that time spent?

There's a floor on the amount of toil any SRE has to handle if they are on-call. A typical SRE has one week of primary on-call and one week of secondary on-call in each cycle (for discussion of primary versus secondary on-call shifts, see Being On-Call). It follows that in a 6-person rotation, at least 2 of every 6 weeks are dedicated to on-call shifts and interrupt handling, which means the lower bound on potential toil is 2/6 = 33% of an SRE's time. In an 8-person rotation, the lower bound is 2/8 = 25%.
Consistent with this data, SREs report that their top source of toil is interrupts (that is, non-urgent service-related messages and emails). The next leading source is on-call (urgent) response, followed by releases and pushes. Even though our release and push processes are usually handled with a fair amount of automation, there's still plenty of room for improvement in this area.
Quarterly surveys of Google's SREs show that the average time spent toiling is about 33%, so we do much better than our overall target of 50%. However, the average doesn't capture outliers: some SREs claim 0% toil (pure development

projects with no on-call work) and others claim 80% toil. When individual SREs report excessive toil, it often indicates a need for managers to spread the toil load more evenly across the team and to encourage those SREs to find satisfying engineering projects.

What Qualifies as Engineering?
Engineering work is novel and intrinsically requires human judgment. It produces a permanent improvement in your service, and is guided by a strategy. It is frequently creative and innovative, taking a design-driven approach to solving a problem-the more generalized, the better. Engineering work helps your team or the SRE organization handle a larger service, or more services, with the same level of staffing.
Typical SRE activities fall into the following approximate categories: Software engineering
Involves writing or modifying code, in addition to any associated design and documentation work. Examples include writing automation scripts, creating tools or frameworks, adding service features for scalability and reliability, or modifying infrastructure code to make it more robust.
Systems engineering

Involves configuring production systems, modifying configurations, or documenting systems in a way that produces lasting improvements from a one-time effort. Examples include monitoring setup and updates, load balancing configuration, server configuration, tuning of OS parameters, and load balancer setup. Systems engineering also includes consulting on architecture, design, and productionization for developer teams.

Toil

Work directly tied to running a service that is repetitive, manual, etc.

Overhead

Administrative work not tied directly to running a service. Examples

include hiring, HR paperwork, team/company meetings, bug queue hygiene, snippets, peer reviews and self-assessments, and training courses.
Every SRE needs to spend at least 50% of their time on engineering work, when averaged over a few quarters or a year. Toil tends to be spiky, so a steady 50% of time spent on engineering may not be realistic for some SRE teams, and they may dip below that target in some quarters. But if the fraction of time spent on projects averages significantly below 50% over the long haul, the affected team needs to step back and figure out what's wrong.

Is Toil Always Bad?
Toil doesn't make everyone unhappy all the time, especially in small amounts. Predictable and repetitive tasks can be quite calming. They produce a sense of accomplishment and quick wins. They can be low-risk and low-stress activities. Some people gravitate toward tasks involving toil and may even enjoy that type of work.
Toil isn't always and invariably bad, and everyone needs to be absolutely clear that some amount of toil is unavoidable in the SRE role, and indeed in almost any engineering role. It's fine in small doses, and if you're happy with those small doses, toil is not a problem. Toil becomes toxic when experienced in large quantities. If you're burdened with too much toil, you should be very concerned and complain loudly. Among the many reasons why too much toil is bad, consider the following:
Career stagnation

Your career progress will slow down or grind to a halt if you spend too little time on projects. Google rewards grungy work when it's inevitable and has a big positive impact, but you can't make a career out of grunge.
Low morale

People have different limits for how much toil they can tolerate, but everyone has a limit. Too much toil leads to burnout, boredom, and discontent.
Additionally, spending too much time on toil at the expense of time spent

engineering hurts an SRE organization in the following ways: Creates confusion
We work hard to ensure that everyone who works in or with the SRE organization understands that we are an engineering organization. Individuals or teams within SRE that engage in too much toil undermine the clarity of that communication and confuse people about our role.
Slows progress

Excessive toil makes a team less productive. A product's feature velocity will slow if the SRE team is too busy with manual work and firefighting to roll out new features promptly.
Sets precedent

If you're too willing to take on toil, your Dev counterparts will have incentives to load you down with even more toil, sometimes shifting operational tasks that should rightfully be performed by Devs to SRE. Other teams may also start expecting SREs to take on such work, which is bad for obvious reasons.
Promotes attrition

Even if you're not personally unhappy with toil, your current or future teammates might like it much less. If you build too much toil into your team's procedures, you motivate the team's best engineers to start looking elsewhere for a more rewarding job.
Causes breach of faith

New hires or transfers who joined SRE with the promise of project work will feel cheated, which is bad for morale.

Conclusion
If we all commit to eliminate a bit of toil each week with some good engineering, we'll steadily clean up our services, and we can shift our collective

efforts to engineering for scale, architecting the next generation of services, and building cross-SRE toolchains. Let's invent more, and toil less.

19We use the Objectives and Key Results system, pioneered by Andy Grove at Intel; see [Kla12].

20Googlers record short free-form summaries, or "snippets," of what we've worked on each week.

21We have to be careful about saying a task is "not toil because it needs human judgment." We need to think carefully about whether the nature of the task intrinsically requires human judgment and cannot be addressed by better design. For example, one could build (and some have built) a service that alerts its SREs several times a day, where each alert requires a complex response involving plenty of human judgment. Such a service is poorly designed, with unnecessary complexity. The system needs to be simplified and rebuilt to either eliminate the underlying failure conditions or deal with these conditions automatically. Until the redesign and reimplementation are finished, and the improved service is rolled out, the work of applying human judgment to respond to each alert is definitely toil.

Chapter 6 - Monitoring Distributed Systems
Written by Rob Ewaschuk Edited by Betsy Beyer
Google's SRE teams have some basic principles and best practices for building successful monitoring and alerting systems. This chapter offers guidelines for what issues should interrupt a human via a page, and how to deal with issues that aren't serious enough to trigger a page.

Definitions
There's no uniformly shared vocabulary for discussing all topics related to monitoring. Even within Google, usage of the following terms varies, but the most common interpretations are listed here.
Monitoring

Collecting, processing, aggregating, and displaying real-time quantitative data about a system, such as query counts and types, error counts and types, processing times, and server lifetimes.
White-box monitoring

Monitoring based on metrics exposed by the internals of the system, including logs, interfaces like the Java Virtual Machine Profiling Interface, or an HTTP handler that emits internal statistics.
Black-box monitoring

Testing externally visible behavior as a user would see it.

Dashboard

An application (usually web-based) that provides a summary view of a

service's core metrics. A dashboard may have filters, selectors, and so on, but is prebuilt to expose the metrics most important to its users. The dashboard might also display team information such as ticket queue length, a list of high-priority bugs, the current on-call engineer for a given area of responsibility, or recent pushes.
Alert

A notification intended to be read by a human and that is pushed to a system such as a bug or ticket queue, an email alias, or a pager. Respectively, these alerts are classified as tickets, email alerts,22 and pages.
Root cause

A defect in a software or human system that, if repaired, instills confidence that this event won't happen again in the same way. A given incident might have multiple root causes: for example, perhaps it was caused by a combination of insufficient process automation, software that crashed on bogus input, and insufficient testing of the script used to generate the configuration. Each of these factors might stand alone as a root cause, and each should be repaired.
Node and machine

Used interchangeably to indicate a single instance of a running kernel in either a physical server, virtual machine, or container. There might be multiple services worth monitoring on a single machine. The services may either be:
Related to each other: for example, a caching server and a web server Unrelated services sharing hardware: for example, a code repository and a master for a configuration system like Puppet or Chef
Push

Any change to a service's running software or its configuration.

Why Monitor?
There are many reasons to monitor a system, including:

Analyzing long-term trends

How big is my database and how fast is it growing? How quickly is my daily-active user count growing?
Comparing over time or experiment groups

Are queries faster with Acme Bucket of Bytes 2.72 versus Ajax DB 3.14? How much better is my memcache hit rate with an extra node? Is my site slower than it was last week?
Alerting

Something is broken, and somebody needs to fix it right now! Or, something might break soon, so somebody should look soon.
Building dashboards

Dashboards should answer basic questions about your service, and normally include some form of the four golden signals (discussed in The Four Golden Signals).
Conducting ad hoc retrospective analysis (i.e., debugging)

Our latency just shot up; what else happened around the same time?

System monitoring is also helpful in supplying raw input into business analytics and in facilitating analysis of security breaches. Because this book focuses on the engineering domains in which SRE has particular expertise, we won't discuss these applications of monitoring here.
Monitoring and alerting enables a system to tell us when it's broken, or perhaps to tell us what's about to break. When the system isn't able to automatically fix itself, we want a human to investigate the alert, determine if there's a real problem at hand, mitigate the problem, and determine the root cause of the problem. Unless you're performing security auditing on very narrowly scoped components of a system, you should never trigger an alert simply because "something seems a bit weird."
Paging a human is a quite expensive use of an employee's time. If an employee

is at work, a page interrupts their workflow. If the employee is at home, a page interrupts their personal time, and perhaps even their sleep. When pages occur too frequently, employees second-guess, skim, or even ignore incoming alerts, sometimes even ignoring a "real" page that's masked by the noise. Outages can be prolonged because other noise interferes with a rapid diagnosis and fix. Effective alerting systems have good signal and very low noise.

Setting Reasonable Expectations for Monitoring
Monitoring a complex application is a significant engineering endeavor in and of itself. Even with substantial existing infrastructure for instrumentation, collection, display, and alerting in place, a Google SRE team with 10-12 members typically has one or sometimes two members whose primary assignment is to build and maintain monitoring systems for their service. This number has decreased over time as we generalize and centralize common monitoring infrastructure, but every SRE team typically has at least one "monitoring person." (That being said, while it can be fun to have access to traffic graph dashboards and the like, SRE teams carefully avoid any situation that requires someone to "stare at a screen to watch for problems.")
In general, Google has trended toward simpler and faster monitoring systems, with better tools for post hoc analysis. We avoid "magic" systems that try to learn thresholds or automatically detect causality. Rules that detect unexpected changes in end-user request rates are one counterexample; while these rules are still kept as simple as possible, they give a very quick detection of a very simple, specific, severe anomaly. Other uses of monitoring data such as capacity planning and traffic prediction can tolerate more fragility, and thus, more complexity. Observational experiments conducted over a very long time horizon (months or years) with a low sampling rate (hours or days) can also often tolerate more fragility because occasional missed samples won't hide a long- running trend.
Google SRE has experienced only limited success with complex dependency hierarchies. We seldom use rules such as, "If I know the database is slow, alert for a slow database; otherwise, alert for the website being generally slow." Dependency-reliant rules usually pertain to very stable parts of our system, such as our system for draining user traffic away from a datacenter. For example, "If a datacenter is drained, then don't alert me on its latency" is one common

datacenter alerting rule. Few teams at Google maintain complex dependency hierarchies because our infrastructure has a steady rate of continuous refactoring.
Some of the ideas described in this chapter are still aspirational: there is always room to move more rapidly from symptom to root cause(s), especially in ever- changing systems. So while this chapter sets out some goals for monitoring systems, and some ways to achieve these goals, it's important that monitoring systems-especially the critical path from the onset of a production problem, through a page to a human, through basic triage and deep debugging-be kept simple and comprehensible by everyone on the team.
Similarly, to keep noise low and signal high, the elements of your monitoring system that direct to a pager need to be very simple and robust. Rules that generate alerts for humans should be simple to understand and represent a clear failure.

Symptoms Versus Causes
Your monitoring system should address two questions: what's broken, and why?

The "what's broken" indicates the symptom; the "why" indicates a (possibly intermediate) cause. Table 6-1 lists some hypothetical symptoms and corresponding causes.
Table 6-1. Example symptoms and causes
Symptom	Cause

I'm serving HTTP 500s or 404s	Database servers are refusing





My responses are slow

CPUs are overloaded by a bogosort, or an Ethernet cable is crimped under a rack, visible as partial packet loss




Users in Antarctica aren't receiving animated cat GIFs

Your Content Distribution Network hates scientists and felines, and thus blacklisted some client IPs

A new software push caused ACLs to be forgotten and allowed all requests

"What" versus "why" is one of the most important distinctions in writing good monitoring with maximum signal and minimum noise.

Black-Box Versus White-Box
We combine heavy use of white-box monitoring with modest but critical uses of black-box monitoring. The simplest way to think about black-box monitoring versus white-box monitoring is that black-box monitoring is symptom-oriented and represents active-not predicted-problems: "The system isn't working correctly, right now." White-box monitoring depends on the ability to inspect the innards of the system, such as logs or HTTP endpoints, with instrumentation. White-box monitoring therefore allows detection of imminent problems, failures masked by retries, and so forth.
Note that in a multilayered system, one person's symptom is another person's cause. For example, suppose that a database's performance is slow. Slow database reads are a symptom for the database SRE who detects them. However, for the frontend SRE observing a slow website, the same slow database reads are a cause. Therefore, white-box monitoring is sometimes symptom-oriented, and sometimes cause-oriented, depending on just how informative your white-box is.
When collecting telemetry for debugging, white-box monitoring is essential. If web servers seem slow on database-heavy requests, you need to know both how fast the web server perceives the database to be, and how fast the database believes itself to be. Otherwise, you can't distinguish an actually slow database server from a network problem between your web server and your database.
For paging, black-box monitoring has the key benefit of forcing discipline to only nag a human when a problem is both already ongoing and contributing to real symptoms. On the other hand, for not-yet-occurring but imminent problems, black-box monitoring is fairly useless.

The Four Golden Signals

The four golden signals of monitoring are latency, traffic, errors, and saturation. If you can only measure four metrics of your user-facing system, focus on these four.
Latency

The time it takes to service a request. It's important to distinguish between the latency of successful requests and the latency of failed requests. For example, an HTTP 500 error triggered due to loss of connection to a database or other critical backend might be served very quickly; however, as an HTTP 500 error indicates a failed request, factoring 500s into your overall latency might result in misleading calculations. On the other hand, a slow error is even worse than a fast error! Therefore, it's important to track error latency, as opposed to just filtering out errors.
Traffic

A measure of how much demand is being placed on your system, measured in a high-level system-specific metric. For a web service, this measurement is usually HTTP requests per second, perhaps broken out by the nature of the requests (e.g., static versus dynamic content). For an audio streaming system, this measurement might focus on network I/O rate or concurrent sessions. For a key-value storage system, this measurement might be transactions and retrievals per second.
Errors

The rate of requests that fail, either explicitly (e.g., HTTP 500s), implicitly (for example, an HTTP 200 success response, but coupled with the wrong content), or by policy (for example, "If you committed to one-second response times, any request over one second is an error"). Where protocol response codes are insufficient to express all failure conditions, secondary (internal) protocols may be necessary to track partial failure modes. Monitoring these cases can be drastically different: catching HTTP 500s at your load balancer can do a decent job of catching all completely failed requests, while only end-to-end system tests can detect that you're serving the wrong content.

Saturation

How "full" your service is. A measure of your system fraction, emphasizing the resources that are most constrained (e.g., in a memory-constrained system, show memory; in an I/O-constrained system, show I/O). Note that many systems degrade in performance before they achieve 100% utilization, so having a utilization target is essential.
In complex systems, saturation can be supplemented with higher-level load measurement: can your service properly handle double the traffic, handle only 10% more traffic, or handle even less traffic than it currently receives? For very simple services that have no parameters that alter the complexity of the request (e.g., "Give me a nonce" or "I need a globally unique monotonic integer") that rarely change configuration, a static value from a load test might be adequate. As discussed in the previous paragraph, however, most services need to use indirect signals like CPU utilization or network bandwidth that have a known upper bound. Latency increases are often a leading indicator of saturation. Measuring your 99th percentile response time over some small window (e.g., one minute) can give a very early signal of saturation.
Finally, saturation is also concerned with predictions of impending saturation, such as "It looks like your database will fill its hard drive in 4 hours."
If you measure all four golden signals and page a human when one signal is problematic (or, in the case of saturation, nearly problematic), your service will be at least decently covered by monitoring.

Worrying About Your Tail (or, Instrumentation and Performance)
When building a monitoring system from scratch, it's tempting to design a system based upon the mean of some quantity: the mean latency, the mean CPU usage of your nodes, or the mean fullness of your databases. The danger presented by the latter two cases is obvious: CPUs and databases can easily be utilized in a very imbalanced way. The same holds for latency. If you run a web service with an average latency of 100 ms at 1,000 requests per second, 1% of

requests might easily take 5 seconds.23 If your users depend on several such web services to render their page, the 99th percentile of one backend can easily become the median response of your frontend.
The simplest way to differentiate between a slow average and a very slow "tail" of requests is to collect request counts bucketed by latencies (suitable for rendering a histogram), rather than actual latencies: how many requests did I serve that took between 0 ms and 10 ms, between 10 ms and 30 ms, between 30 ms and 100 ms, between 100 ms and 300 ms, and so on? Distributing the histogram boundaries approximately exponentially (in this case by factors of roughly 3) is often an easy way to visualize the distribution of your requests.

Choosing an Appropriate Resolution for Measurements
Different aspects of a system should be measured with different levels of granularity. For example:
Observing CPU load over the time span of a minute won't reveal even quite long-lived spikes that drive high tail latencies.
On the other hand, for a web service targeting no more than 9 hours aggregate downtime per year (99.9% annual uptime), probing for a 200 (success) status more than once or twice a minute is probably unnecessarily frequent.
Similarly, checking hard drive fullness for a service targeting 99.9% availability more than once every 1-2 minutes is probably unnecessary.
Take care in how you structure the granularity of your measurements. Collecting per-second measurements of CPU load might yield interesting data, but such frequent measurements may be very expensive to collect, store, and analyze. If your monitoring goal calls for high resolution but doesn't require extremely low latency, you can reduce these costs by performing internal sampling on the server, then configuring an external system to collect and aggregate that distribution over time or across servers. You might:
1. Record the current CPU utilization each second.
2. Using buckets of 5% granularity, increment the appropriate CPU utilization bucket each second.

3. Aggregate those values every minute.

This strategy allows you to observe brief CPU hotspots without incurring very high cost due to collection and retention.

As Simple as Possible, No Simpler
Piling all these requirements on top of each other can add up to a very complex monitoring system-your system might end up with the following levels of complexity:
Alerts on different latency thresholds, at different percentiles, on all kinds of different metrics
Extra code to detect and expose possible causes Associated dashboards for each of these possible causes
The sources of potential complexity are never-ending. Like all software systems, monitoring can become so complex that it's fragile, complicated to change, and a maintenance burden.
Therefore, design your monitoring system with an eye toward simplicity. In choosing what to monitor, keep the following guidelines in mind:
The rules that catch real incidents most often should be as simple, predictable, and reliable as possible.
Data collection, aggregation, and alerting configuration that is rarely exercised (e.g., less than once a quarter for some SRE teams) should be up for removal.
Signals that are collected, but not exposed in any prebaked dashboard nor used by any alert, are candidates for removal.
In Google's experience, basic collection and aggregation of metrics, paired with alerting and dashboards, has worked well as a relatively standalone system. (In fact Google's monitoring system is broken up into several binaries, but typically people learn about all aspects of these binaries.) It can be tempting to combine monitoring with other aspects of inspecting complex systems, such as detailed system profiling, single-process debugging, tracking details about exceptions or crashes, load testing, log collection and analysis, or traffic inspection. While most of these subjects share commonalities with basic monitoring, blending

together too many results in overly complex and fragile systems. As in many other aspects of software engineering, maintaining distinct systems with clear, simple, loosely coupled points of integration is a better strategy (for example, using web APIs for pulling summary data in a format that can remain constant over an extended period of time).

Tying These Principles Together
The principles discussed in this chapter can be tied together into a philosophy on monitoring and alerting that's widely endorsed and followed within Google SRE teams. While this monitoring philosophy is a bit aspirational, it's a good starting point for writing or reviewing a new alert, and it can help your organization ask the right questions, regardless of the size of your organization or the complexity of your service or system.
When creating rules for monitoring and alerting, asking the following questions can help you avoid false positives and pager burnout:24
Does this rule detect an otherwise undetected condition that is urgent, actionable, and actively or imminently user-visible?25
Will I ever be able to ignore this alert, knowing it's benign? When and why
will I be able to ignore this alert, and how can I avoid this scenario?
Does this alert definitely indicate that users are being negatively affected? Are there detectable cases in which users aren't being negatively impacted, such as drained traffic or test deployments, that should be filtered out?
Can I take action in response to this alert? Is that action urgent, or could it wait until morning? Could the action be safely automated? Will that action be a long-term fix, or just a short-term workaround?
Are other people getting paged for this issue, therefore rendering at least one of the pages unnecessary?
These questions reflect a fundamental philosophy on pages and pagers:

Every time the pager goes off, I should be able to react with a sense of urgency. I can only react with a sense of urgency a few times a day before I become fatigued.
Every page should be actionable.
Every page response should require intelligence. If a page merely merits a

robotic response, it shouldn't be a page.
Pages should be about a novel problem or an event that hasn't been seen before.
Such a perspective dissipates certain distinctions: if a page satisfies the preceding four bullets, it's irrelevant whether the page is triggered by white-box or black-box monitoring. This perspective also amplifies certain distinctions: it's better to spend much more effort on catching symptoms than causes; when it comes to causes, only worry about very definite, very imminent causes.

Monitoring for the Long Term
In modern production systems, monitoring systems track an ever-evolving system with changing software architecture, load characteristics, and performance targets. An alert that's currently exceptionally rare and hard to automate might become frequent, perhaps even meriting a hacked-together script to resolve it. At this point, someone should find and eliminate the root causes of the problem; if such resolution isn't possible, the alert response deserves to be fully automated.
It's important that decisions about monitoring be made with long-term goals in mind. Every page that happens today distracts a human from improving the system for tomorrow, so there is often a case for taking a short-term hit to availability or performance in order to improve the long-term outlook for the system. Let's take a look at two case studies that illustrate this trade-off.

Bigtable SRE: A Tale of Over-Alerting

Google's internal infrastructure is typically offered and measured against a service level objective (SLO; see Service Level Objectives). Many years ago, the Bigtable service's SLO was based on a synthetic well-behaved client's mean performance. Because of problems in Bigtable and lower layers of the storage stack, the mean performance was driven by a "large" tail: the worst 5% of requests were often significantly slower than the rest.
Email alerts were triggered as the SLO approached, and paging alerts were triggered when the SLO was exceeded. Both types of alerts were firing voluminously, consuming unacceptable amounts of engineering time: the team

spent significant amounts of time triaging the alerts to find the few that were really actionable, and we often missed the problems that actually affected users, because so few of them did. Many of the pages were non-urgent, due to well- understood problems in the infrastructure, and had either rote responses or received no response.
To remedy the situation, the team used a three-pronged approach: while making great efforts to improve the performance of Bigtable, we also temporarily dialed back our SLO target, using the 75th percentile request latency. We also disabled email alerts, as there were so many that spending time diagnosing them was infeasible.
This strategy gave us enough breathing room to actually fix the longer-term problems in Bigtable and the lower layers of the storage stack, rather than constantly fixing tactical problems. On-call engineers could actually accomplish work when they weren't being kept up by pages at all hours. Ultimately, temporarily backing off on our alerts allowed us to make faster progress toward a better service.

Gmail: Predictable, Scriptable Responses from Humans

In the very early days of Gmail, the service was built on a retrofitted distributed process management system called Workqueue, which was originally created for batch processing of pieces of the search index. Workqueue was "adapted" to long-lived processes and subsequently applied to Gmail, but certain bugs in the relatively opaque codebase in the scheduler proved hard to beat.
At that time, the Gmail monitoring was structured such that alerts fired when individual tasks were "de-scheduled" by Workqueue. This setup was less than ideal because even at that time, Gmail had many, many thousands of tasks, each task representing a fraction of a percent of our users. We cared deeply about providing a good user experience for Gmail users, but such an alerting setup was unmaintainable.
To address this problem, Gmail SRE built a tool that helped "poke" the scheduler in just the right way to minimize impact to users. The team had several discussions about whether or not we should simply automate the entire loop from detecting the problem to nudging the rescheduler, until a better long-term solution was achieved, but some worried this kind of workaround would delay a

real fix.

This kind of tension is common within a team, and often reflects an underlying mistrust of the team's self-discipline: while some team members want to implement a "hack" to allow time for a proper fix, others worry that a hack will be forgotten or that the proper fix will be deprioritized indefinitely. This concern is credible, as it's easy to build layers of unmaintainable technical debt by patching over problems instead of making real fixes. Managers and technical leaders play a key role in implementing true, long-term fixes by supporting and prioritizing potentially time-consuming long-term fixes even when the initial "pain" of paging subsides.
Pages with rote, algorithmic responses should be a red flag. Unwillingness on the part of your team to automate such pages implies that the team lacks confidence that they can clean up their technical debt. This is a major problem worth escalating.

The Long Run

A common theme connects the previous examples of Bigtable and Gmail: a tension between short-term and long-term availability. Often, sheer force of effort can help a rickety system achieve high availability, but this path is usually short-lived and fraught with burnout and dependence on a small number of heroic team members. Taking a controlled, short-term decrease in availability is often a painful, but strategic trade for the long-run stability of the system. It's important not to think of every page as an event in isolation, but to consider whether the overall level of paging leads toward a healthy, appropriately available system with a healthy, viable team and long-term outlook. We review statistics about page frequency (usually expressed as incidents per shift, where an incident might be composed of a few related pages) in quarterly reports with management, ensuring that decision makers are kept up to date on the pager load and overall health of their teams.

Conclusion
A healthy monitoring and alerting pipeline is simple and easy to reason about. It focuses primarily on symptoms for paging, reserving cause-oriented heuristics to serve as aids to debugging problems. Monitoring symptoms is easier the further

"up" your stack you monitor, though monitoring saturation and performance of subsystems such as databases often must be performed directly on the subsystem itself. Email alerts are of very limited value and tend to easily become overrun with noise; instead, you should favor a dashboard that monitors all ongoing subcritical problems for the sort of information that typically ends up in email alerts. A dashboard might also be paired with a log, in order to analyze historical correlations.
Over the long haul, achieving a successful on-call rotation and product includes choosing to alert on symptoms or imminent real problems, adapting your targets to goals that are actually achievable, and making sure that your monitoring supports rapid diagnosis.

22Sometimes known as "alert spam," as they are rarely read or acted on.
23If 1% of your requests are 50x the average, it means that the rest of your requests are about twice as fast as the average. But if you're not measuring your distribution, the idea that most of your requests are near the mean is just hopeful thinking.

24See  Applying  Cardiac  Alarm  Management  Techniques  to  Your  On-Call
[Hol14] for an example of alert fatigue in another context.

25Zero-redundancy (N + 0) situations count as imminent, as do "nearly full" parts of your service! For more details about the concept of redundancy, see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/N%2B1_redundancy.

Chapter 7 - The Evolution of Automation at Google
Written by Niall Murphy with John Looney and Michael Kacirek Edited by Betsy Beyer
Besides black art, there is only automation and mechanization. Federico Garc�a Lorca (1898-1936), Spanish poet and playwright
For SRE, automation is a force multiplier, not a panacea. Of course, just multiplying force does not naturally change the accuracy of where that force is applied: doing automation thoughtlessly can create as many problems as it solves. Therefore, while we believe that software-based automation is superior to manual operation in most circumstances, better than either option is a higher- level system design requiring neither of them-an autonomous system. Or to put it another way, the value of automation comes from both what it does and its judicious application. We'll discuss both the value of automation and how our attitude has evolved over time.

The Value of Automation

What exactly is the value of automation?26
Consistency

Although scale is an obvious motivation for automation, there are many other reasons to use it. Take the example of university computing systems, where many systems engineering folks started their careers. Systems administrators of that background were generally charged with running a collection of machines or some software, and were accustomed to manually performing various actions in the discharge of that duty. One common example is creating user accounts; others include purely operational duties like making sure backups happen, managing server failover, and small data manipulations like changing the upstream DNS servers' resolv.conf, DNS server zone data, and similar activities.

Ultimately, however, this prevalence of manual tasks is unsatisfactory for both the organizations and indeed the people maintaining systems in this way. For a start, any action performed by a human or humans hundreds of times won't be performed the same way each time: even with the best will in the world, very few of us will ever be as consistent as a machine. This inevitable lack of consistency leads to mistakes, oversights, issues with data quality, and, yes, reliability problems. In this domain-the execution of well-scoped, known procedures the value of consistency is in many ways the primary value of automation.

A Platform

Automation doesn't just provide consistency. Designed and done properly, automatic systems also provide a platform that can be extended, applied to more systems, or perhaps even spun out for profit.27 (The alternative, no automation, is neither cost effective nor extensible: it is instead a tax levied on the operation
of a system.)

A platform also centralizes mistakes. In other words, a bug fixed in the code will be fixed there once and forever, unlike a sufficiently large set of humans performing the same procedure, as discussed previously. A platform can be extended to perform additional tasks more easily than humans can be instructed to perform them (or sometimes even realize that they have to be done). Depending on the nature of the task, it can run either continuously or much more frequently than humans could appropriately accomplish the task, or at times that are inconvenient for humans. Furthermore, a platform can export metrics about its performance, or otherwise allow you to discover details about your process you didn't know previously, because these details are more easily measurable within the context of a platform.

Faster Repairs

There's an additional benefit for systems where automation is used to resolve common faults in a system (a frequent situation for SRE-created automation). If automation runs regularly and successfully enough, the result is a reduced mean time to repair (MTTR) for those common faults. You can then spend your time on other tasks instead, thereby achieving increased developer velocity because you don't have to spend time either preventing a problem or (more commonly)

cleaning up after it. As is well understood in the industry, the later in the product lifecycle a problem is discovered, the more expensive it is to fix; see Testing for Reliability. Generally, problems that occur in actual production are most expensive to fix, both in terms of time and money, which means that an automated system looking for problems as soon as they arise has a good chance of lowering the total cost of the system, given that the system is sufficiently large.

Faster Action

In the infrastructural situations where SRE automation tends to be deployed, humans don't usually react as fast as machines. In most common cases, where, for example, failover or traffic switching can be well defined for a particular application, it makes no sense to effectively require a human to intermittently press a button called "Allow system to continue to run." (Yes, it is true that sometimes automatic procedures can end up making a bad situation worse, but that is why such procedures should be scoped over well-defined domains.) Google has a large amount of automation; in many cases, the services we support could not long survive without this automation because they crossed the threshold of manageable manual operation long ago.

Time Saving

Finally, time saving is an oft-quoted rationale for automation. Although people cite this rationale for automation more than the others, in many ways the benefit is often less immediately calculable. Engineers often waver over whether a particular piece of automation or code is worth writing, in terms of effort saved in not requiring a task to be performed manually versus the effort required to
write it.28 It's easy to overlook the fact that once you have encapsulated some task in automation, anyone can execute the task. Therefore, the time savings apply across anyone who would plausibly use the automation. Decoupling operator from operation is very powerful.
Joseph Bironas, an SRE who led Google's datacenter turnup efforts for a time, forcefully argued:
"If we are engineering processes and solutions that are not automatable, we continue having to staff humans to maintain the system. If we have to staff humans to do the work, we are feeding the machines with the blood, sweat, and

tears of human beings. Think The Matrix with less special effects and more pissed off System Administrators."

The Value for Google SRE
All of these benefits and trade-offs apply to us just as much as anyone else, and Google does have a strong bias toward automation. Part of our preference for automation springs from our particular business challenges: the products and services we look after are planet-spanning in scale, and we don't typically have time to engage in the same kind of machine or service hand-holding common in
other organizations.29 For truly large services, the factors of consistency, quickness, and reliability dominate most conversations about the trade-offs of performing automation.
Another argument in favor of automation, particularly in the case of Google, is our complicated yet surprisingly uniform production environment, described in The Production Environment at Google, from the Viewpoint of an SRE. While other organizations might have an important piece of equipment without a readily accessible API, software for which no source code is available, or another impediment to complete control over production operations, Google generally avoids such scenarios. We have built APIs for systems when no API was available from the vendor. Even though purchasing software for a particular task would have been much cheaper in the short term, we chose to write our own solutions, because doing so produced APIs with the potential for much greater long-term benefits. We spent a lot of time overcoming obstacles to automatic system management, and then resolutely developed that automatic system management itself. Given how Google manages its source code [Pot16], the availability of that code for more or less any system that SRE touches also means that our mission to "own the product in production" is much easier because we control the entirety of the stack.
Of course, although Google is ideologically bent upon using machines to manage machines where possible, reality requires some modification of our approach. It isn't appropriate to automate every component of every system, and not everyone has the ability or inclination to develop automation at a particular time. Some essential systems started out as quick prototypes, not designed to last or to interface with automation. The previous paragraphs state a maximalist view of our position, but one that we have been broadly successful at putting into

action within the Google context. In general, we have chosen to create platforms where we could, or to position ourselves so that we could create platforms over time. We view this platform-based approach as necessary for manageability and scalability.

The Use Cases for Automation
In the industry, automation is the term generally used for writing code to solve a wide variety of problems, although the motivations for writing this code, and the solutions themselves, are often quite different. More broadly, in this view, automation is "meta-software"-software to act on software.
As we implied earlier, there are a number of use cases for automation. Here is a non-exhaustive list of examples:
User account creation
Cluster turnup and turndown for services
Software or hardware installation preparation and decommissioning Rollouts of new software versions
Runtime configuration changes
    A special case of runtime config changes: changes to your dependencies This list could continue essentially ad infinitum.
Google SRE's Use Cases for Automation

In Google, we have all of the use cases just listed, and more.

However, within Google SRE, our primary affinity has typically been for running infrastructure, as opposed to managing the quality of the data that passes over that infrastructure. This line isn't totally clear-for example, we care deeply if half of a dataset vanishes after a push, and therefore we alert on coarse- grain differences like this, but it's rare for us to write the equivalent of changing the properties of some arbitrary subset of accounts on a system. Therefore, the context for our automation is often automation to manage the lifecycle of systems, not their data: for example, deployments of a service in a new cluster.
To this extent, SRE's automation efforts are not far off what many other people and organizations do, except that we use different tools to manage it and have a

different focus (as we'll discuss).

Widely available tools like Puppet, Chef, cfengine, and even Perl, which all provide ways to automate particular tasks, differ mostly in terms of the level of abstraction of the components provided to help the act of automating. A full language like Perl provides POSIX-level affordances, which in theory provide an essentially unlimited scope of automation across the APIs accessible to the
system,30 whereas Chef and Puppet provide out-of-the-box abstractions with which services or other higher-level entities can be manipulated. The trade-off here is classic: higher-level abstractions are easier to manage and reason about, but when you encounter a "leaky abstraction," you fail systemically, repeatedly, and potentially inconsistently. For example, we often assume that pushing a new binary to a cluster is atomic; the cluster will either end up with the old version, or the new version. However, real-world behavior is more complicated: that cluster's network can fail halfway through; machines can fail; communication to the cluster management layer can fail, leaving the system in an inconsistent state; depending on the situation, new binaries could be staged but not pushed, or pushed but not restarted, or restarted but not verifiable. Very few abstractions model these kinds of outcomes successfully, and most generally end up halting themselves and calling for intervention. Truly bad automation systems don't even do that.
SRE has a number of philosophies and products in the domain of automation, some of which look more like generic rollout tools without particularly detailed modeling of higher-level entities, and some of which look more like languages for describing service deployment (and so on) at a very abstract level. Work done in the latter tends to be more reusable and be more of a common platform than the former, but the complexity of our production environment sometimes means that the former approach is the most immediately tractable option.

A Hierarchy of Automation Classes

Although all of these automation steps are valuable, and indeed an automation platform is valuable in and of itself, in an ideal world, we wouldn't need externalized automation. In fact, instead of having a system that has to have external glue logic, it would be even better to have a system that needs no glue logic at all, not just because internalization is more efficient (although such efficiency is useful), but because it has been designed to not need glue logic in the first place. Accomplishing that involves taking the use cases for glue logic-

generally "first order" manipulations of a system, such as adding accounts or performing system turnup-and finding a way to handle those use cases directly within the application.
As a more detailed example, most turnup automation at Google is problematic because it ends up being maintained separately from the core system and therefore suffers from "bit rot," i.e., not changing when the underlying systems change. Despite the best of intentions, attempting to more tightly couple the two (turnup automation and the core system) often fails due to unaligned priorities, as product developers will, not unreasonably, resist a test deployment requirement for every change. Secondly, automation that is crucial but only executed at infrequent intervals and therefore difficult to test is often particularly fragile because of the extended feedback cycle. Cluster failover is one classic example of infrequently executed automation: failovers might only occur every few months, or infrequently enough that inconsistencies between instances are introduced. The evolution of automation follows a path:
1) No automation

Database master is failed over manually between locations.

2) Externally maintained system-specific automation

An SRE has a failover script in his or her home directory.

3) Externally maintained generic automation

The SRE adds database support to a "generic failover" script that everyone uses.
4) Internally maintained system-specific automation The database ships with its own failover script.
5) Systems that don't need any automation

The database notices problems, and automatically fails over without human intervention.
SRE hates manual operations, so we obviously try to create systems that don't

require them. However, sometimes manual operations are unavoidable.

There is additionally a subvariety of automation that applies changes not across the domain of specific system-related configuration, but across the domain of production as a whole. In a highly centralized proprietary production environment like Google's, there are a large number of changes that have a non- service-specific scope-e.g., changing upstream Chubby servers, a flag change to the Bigtable client library to make access more reliable, and so on-which nonetheless need to be safely managed and rolled back if necessary. Beyond a certain volume of changes, it is infeasible for production-wide changes to be accomplished manually, and at some time before that point, it's a waste to have manual oversight for a process where a large proportion of the changes are either trivial or accomplished successfully by basic relaunch-and-check strategies.
Let's use internal case studies to illustrate some of the preceding points in detail. The first case study is about how, due to some diligent, far-sighted work, we managed to achieve the self-professed nirvana of SRE: to automate ourselves out of a job.

Automate Yourself Out of a Job: Automate ALL the Things!
For a long while, the Ads products at Google stored their data in a MySQL database. Because Ads data obviously has high reliability requirements, an SRE team was charged with looking after that infrastructure. From 2005 to 2008, the Ads Database mostly ran in what we considered to be a mature and managed state. For example, we had automated away the worst, but not all, of the routine work for standard replica replacements. We believed the Ads Database was well managed and that we had harvested most of the low-hanging fruit in terms of optimization and scale. However, as daily operations became comfortable, team members began to look at the next level of system development: migrating MySQL onto Google's cluster scheduling system, Borg.
We hoped this migration would provide two main benefits:

Completely	eliminate	machine/replica	maintenance:	Borg	would automatically handle the setup/restart of new and broken tasks.
Enable bin-packing of multiple MySQL instances on the same physical

machine: Borg would enable more efficient use of machine resources via Containers.
In late 2008, we successfully deployed a proof of concept MySQL instance on Borg. Unfortunately, this was accompanied by a significant new difficulty. A core operating characteristic of Borg is that its tasks move around automatically. Tasks commonly move within Borg as frequently as once or twice per week. This frequency was tolerable for our database replicas, but unacceptable for our masters.
At that time, the process for master failover took 30-90 minutes per instance. Simply because we ran on shared machines and were subject to reboots for kernel upgrades, in addition to the normal rate of machine failure, we had to expect a number of otherwise unrelated failovers every week. This factor, in combination with the number of shards on which our system was hosted, meant that:

Manual failovers would consume a substantial amount of human hours and would give us best-case availability of 99% uptime, which fell short of the actual business requirements of the product.
In order to meet our error budgets, each failover would have to take less than 30 seconds of downtime. There was no way to optimize a human- dependent procedure to make downtime shorter than 30 seconds.
Therefore, our only choice was to automate failover. Actually, we needed to automate more than just failover.
In 2009 Ads SRE completed our automated failover daemon, which we dubbed "Decider." Decider could complete MySQL failovers for both planned and unplanned failovers in less than 30 seconds 95% of the time. With the creation of Decider, MySQL on Borg (MoB) finally became a reality. We graduated from optimizing our infrastructure for a lack of failover to embracing the idea that failure is inevitable, and therefore optimizing to recover quickly through automation.
While automation let us achieve highly available MySQL in a world that forced up to two restarts per week, it did come with its own set of costs. All of our applications had to be changed to include significantly more failure-handling logic than before. Given that the norm in the MySQL development world is to

assume that the MySQL instance will be the most stable component in the stack, this switch meant customizing software like JDBC to be more tolerant of our failure-prone environment. However, the benefits of migrating to MoB with Decider were well worth these costs. Once on MoB, the time our team spent on mundane operational tasks dropped by 95%. Our failovers were automated, so an outage of a single database task no longer paged a human.
The main upshot of this new automation was that we had a lot more free time to spend on improving other parts of the infrastructure. Such improvements had a cascading effect: the more time we saved, the more time we were able to spend on optimizing and automating other tedious work. Eventually, we were able to automate schema changes, causing the cost of total operational maintenance of the Ads Database to drop by nearly 95%. Some might say that we had successfully automated ourselves out of this job. The hardware side of our domain also saw improvement. Migrating to MoB freed up considerable resources because we could schedule multiple MySQL instances on the same machines, which improved utilization of our hardware. In total, we were able to free up about 60% of our hardware. Our team was now flush with hardware and engineering resources.
This example demonstrates the wisdom of going the extra mile to deliver a platform rather than replacing existing manual procedures. The next example comes from the cluster infrastructure group, and illustrates some of the more difficult trade-offs you might encounter on your way to automating all the things.

Soothing the Pain: Applying Automation to Cluster Turnups
Ten years ago, the Cluster Infrastructure SRE team seemed to get a new hire every few months. As it turned out, that was approximately the same frequency at which we turned up a new cluster. Because turning up a service in a new cluster gives new hires exposure to a service's internals, this task seemed like a natural and useful training tool.
The steps taken to get a cluster ready for use were something like the following:

1. Fit out a datacenter building for power and cooling.
2. Install and configure core switches and connections to the backbone.

3. Install a few initial racks of servers.
4. Configure basic services such as DNS and installers, then configure a lock service, storage, and computing.
5. Deploy the remaining racks of machines.
6. Assign user-facing services resources, so their teams can set up the services.
Steps 4 and 6 were extremely complex. While basic services like DNS are relatively simple, the storage and compute subsystems at that time were still in heavy development, so new flags, components, and optimizations were added weekly.
Some services had more than a hundred different component subsystems, each with a complex web of dependencies. Failing to configure one subsystem, or configuring a system or component differently than other deployments, is a customer-impacting outage waiting to happen.
In one case, a multi-petabyte Bigtable cluster was configured to not use the first (logging) disk on 12-disk systems, for latency reasons. A year later, some automation assumed that if a machine's first disk wasn't being used, that machine didn't have any storage configured; therefore, it was safe to wipe the machine and set it up from scratch. All of the Bigtable data was wiped, instantly. Thankfully we had multiple real-time replicas of the dataset, but such surprises are unwelcome. Automation needs to be careful about relying on implicit "safety" signals.
Early automation focused on accelerating cluster delivery. This approach tended to rely upon creative use of SSH for tedious package distribution and service initialization problems. This strategy was an initial win, but those free-form scripts became a cholesterol of technical debt.

Detecting Inconsistencies with Prodtest

As the numbers of clusters grew, some clusters required hand-tuned flags and settings. As a result, teams wasted more and more time chasing down difficult- to-spot misconfigurations. If a flag that made GFS more responsive to log processing leaked into the default templates, cells with many files could run out of memory under load. Infuriating and time-consuming misconfigurations crept in with nearly every large configuration change.

The creative-though brittle-shell scripts we used to configure clusters were neither scaling to the number of people who wanted to make changes nor to the sheer number of cluster permutations that needed to be built. These shell scripts also failed to resolve more significant concerns before declaring that a service was good to take customer-facing traffic, such as:
Were all of the service's dependencies available and correctly configured? Were all configurations and packages consistent with other deployments? Could the team confirm that every configuration exception was desired?
Prodtest (Production Test) was an ingenious solution to these unwelcome surprises. We extended the Python unit test framework to allow for unit testing of real-world services. These unit tests have dependencies, allowing a chain of tests, and a failure in one test would quickly abort. Take the test shown in Figure 7-1 as an example.


Figure 7-1. ProdTest for DNS Service, showing how one failed test aborts the subsequent chain of tests
A given team's Prodtest was given the cluster name, and it could validate that team's services in that cluster. Later additions allowed us to generate a graph of the unit tests and their states. This functionality allowed an engineer to see quickly if their service was correctly configured in all clusters, and if not, why. The graph highlighted the failed step, and the failing Python unit test output a more verbose error message.
Any time a team encountered a delay due to another team's unexpected misconfiguration, a bug could be filed to extend their Prodtest. This ensured that a similar problem would be discovered earlier in the future. SREs were proud to be able to assure their customers that all services-both newly turned up services

and existing services with new configuration-would reliably serve production traffic.
For the first time, our project managers could predict when a cluster could "go live," and had a complete understanding of why each clusters took six or more weeks to go from "network-ready" to "serving live traffic." Out of the blue, SRE received a mission from senior management: In three months, five new clusters will reach network-ready on the same day. Please turn them up in one week.

Resolving Inconsistencies Idempotently

A "One Week Turnup" was a terrifying mission. We had tens of thousands of lines of shell script owned by dozens of teams. We could quickly tell how unprepared any given cluster was, but fixing it meant that the dozens of teams would have to file hundreds of bugs, and then we had to hope that these bugs would be promptly fixed.
We realized that evolving from "Python unit tests finding misconfigurations" to "Python code fixing misconfigurations" could enable us to fix these issues faster.
The unit test already knew which cluster we were examining and the specific test that was failing, so we paired each test with a fix. If each fix was written to be idempotent, and could assume that all dependencies were met, resolving the problem should have been easy-and safe-to resolve. Requiring idempotent fixes meant teams could run their "fix script" every 15 minutes without fearing damage to the cluster's configuration. If the DNS team's test was blocked on the Machine Database team's configuration of a new cluster, as soon as the cluster appeared in the database, the DNS team's tests and fixes would start working.
Take the test shown in Figure 7-2 as an example. If TestDnsMonitoringConfigExists fails, as shown, we can call FixDnsMonitoringCreateConfig, which scrapes configuration from a database, then checks a skeleton configuration file into our revision control system. Then TestDnsMonitoringConfigExists passes on retry, and the TestDnsMonitoringConfigPushed test can be attempted. If the test fails, the FixDnsMonitoringPushConfig step runs. If a fix fails multiple times, the automation assumes that the fix failed and stops, notifying the user.

Armed with these scripts, a small group of engineers could ensure that we could

go from "The network works, and machines are listed in the database" to "Serving 1% of websearch and ads traffic" in a matter of a week or two. At the time, this seemed to be the apex of automation technology.
Looking back, this approach was deeply flawed; the latency between the test, the fix, and then a second test introduced flaky tests that sometimes worked and sometimes failed. Not all fixes were naturally idempotent, so a flaky test that was followed by a fix might render the system in an inconsistent state.

Figure 7-2. ProdTest for DNS Service, showing that one failed test resulted in only running one fix

The Inclination to Specialize

Automation processes can vary in three respects:

Competence, i.e., their accuracy
Latency, how quickly all steps are executed when initiated
Relevance, or proportion of real-world process covered by automation

We began with a process that was highly competent (maintained and run by the service owners), high-latency (the service owners performed the process in their spare time or assigned it to new engineers), and very relevant (the service owners knew when the real world changed, and could fix the automation).
To reduce turnup latency, many service owning teams instructed a single "turnup team" what automation to run. The turnup team used tickets to start each stage in the turnup so that we could track the remaining tasks, and who those tasks were assigned to. If the human interactions regarding automation modules occurred between people in the same room, cluster turnups could happen in a much shorter time. Finally, we had our competent, accurate, and timely automation process!
But this state didn't last long. The real world is chaotic: software, configuration, data, etc. changed, resulting in over a thousand separate changes a day to affected systems. The people most affected by automation bugs were no longer domain experts, so the automation became less relevant (meaning that new steps were missed) and less competent (new flags might have caused automation to fail). However, it took a while for this drop in quality to impact velocity.
Automation code, like unit test code, dies when the maintaining team isn't obsessive about keeping the code in sync with the codebase it covers. The world changes around the code: the DNS team adds new configuration options, the storage team changes their package names, and the networking team needs to support new devices.
By relieving teams who ran services of the responsibility to maintain and run their automation code, we created ugly organizational incentives:
A team whose primary task is to speed up the current turnup has no incentive to reduce the technical debt of the service-owning team running the service in production later.
A team not running automation has no incentive to build systems that are easy to automate.

A product manager whose schedule is not affected by low-quality automation will always prioritize new features over simplicity and automation.
The most functional tools are usually written by those who use them. A similar argument applies to why product development teams benefit from keeping at least some operational awareness of their systems in production.
Turnups were again high-latency, inaccurate, and incompetent-the worst of all worlds. However, an unrelated security mandate allowed us out of this trap. Much of distributed automation relied at that time on SSH. This is clumsy from a security perspective, because people must have root on many machines to run most commands. A growing awareness of advanced, persistent security threats drove us to reduce the privileges SREs enjoyed to the absolute minimum they needed to do their jobs. We had to replace our use of sshd with an authenticated, ACL-driven, RPC-based Local Admin Daemon, also known as Admin Servers, which had permissions to perform those local changes. As a result, no one could install or modify a server without an audit trail. Changes to the Local Admin Daemon and the Package Repo were gated on code reviews, making it very difficult for someone to exceed their authority; giving someone the access to install packages would not let them view colocated logs. The Admin Server logged the RPC requestor, any parameters, and the results of all RPCs to enhance debugging and security audits.

Service-Oriented Cluster-Turnup

In the next iteration, Admin Servers became part of service teams' workflows, both as related to the machine-specific Admin Servers (for installing packages and rebooting) and cluster-level Admin Servers (for actions like draining or turning up a service). SREs moved from writing shell scripts in their home directories to building peer-reviewed RPC servers with fine-grained ACLs.
Later on, after the realization that turnup processes had to be owned by the teams that owned the services fully sank in, we saw this as a way to approach cluster turnup as a Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) problem: service owners would be responsible for creating an Admin Server to handle cluster turnup/turndown RPCs, sent by the system that knew when clusters were ready. In turn, each team would provide the contract (API) that the turnup automation needed, while still being free to change the underlying implementation. As a cluster reached

"network-ready," automation sent an RPC to each Admin Server that played a part in turning up the cluster.
We now have a low-latency, competent, and accurate process; most importantly, this process has stayed strong as the rate of change, the number of teams, and the number of services seem to double each year.
As mentioned earlier, our evolution of turnup automation followed a path:

1. Operator-triggered manual action (no automation)
2. Operator-written, system-specific automation
3. Externally maintained generic automation
4. Internally maintained, system-specific automation
5. Autonomous systems that need no human intervention

While this evolution has, broadly speaking, been a success, the Borg case study illustrates another way we have come to think of the problem of automation.

Borg: Birth of the Warehouse-Scale Computer
Another way to understand the development of our attitude toward automation, and when and where that automation is best deployed, is to consider the history of the development of our cluster management systems.31 Like MySQL on Borg, which demonstrated the success of converting manual operations to automatic
ones, and the cluster turnup process, which demonstrated the downside of not thinking carefully enough about where and how automation was implemented, developing cluster management also ended up demonstrating another lesson about how automation should be done. Like our previous two examples, something quite sophisticated was created as the eventual result of continuous evolution from simpler beginnings.
Google's clusters were initially deployed much like everyone else's small networks of the time: racks of machines with specific purposes and heterogeneous configurations. Engineers would log in to some well-known "master" machine to perform administrative tasks; "golden" binaries and configuration lived on these masters. As we had only one colo provider, most naming logic implicitly assumed that location. As production grew, and we began to use multiple clusters, different domains (cluster names) entered the picture. It became necessary to have a file describing what each machine did,

which grouped machines under some loose naming strategy. This descriptor file, in combination with the equivalent of a parallel SSH, allowed us to reboot (for example) all the search machines in one go. Around this time, it was common to get tickets like "search is done with machine x1, crawl can have the machine now."

Automation development began. Initially automation consisted of simple Python scripts for operations such as the following:
Service	management:	keeping	services	running	(e.g.,	restarts	after segfaults)
Tracking what services were supposed to run on which machines
Log message parsing: SSHing into each machine and looking for regexps

Automation eventually mutated into a proper database that tracked machine state, and also incorporated more sophisticated monitoring tools. With the union set of the automation available, we could now automatically manage much of the lifecycle of machines: noticing when machines were broken, removing the services, sending them to repair, and restoring the configuration when they came back from repair.
But to take a step back, this automation was useful yet profoundly limited, due to the fact that abstractions of the system were relentlessly tied to physical machines. We needed a new approach, hence Borg [Ver15] was born: a system that moved away from the relatively static host/port/job assignments of the previous world, toward treating a collection of machines as a managed sea of resources. Central to its success-and its conception-was the notion of turning cluster management into an entity for which API calls could be issued, to some central coordinator. This liberated extra dimensions of efficiency, flexibility, and reliability: unlike the previous model of machine "ownership," Borg could allow machines to schedule, for example, batch and user-facing tasks on the same machine.
This functionality ultimately resulted in continuous and automatic operating system upgrades with a very small amount of constant32 effort-effort that does not scale with the total size of production deployments. Slight deviations in machine  state  are  now  automatically  fixed;  brokenness  and  lifecycle
management are essentially no-ops for SRE at this point. Thousands of machines are born, die, and go into repairs daily with no SRE effort. To echo the words of

Ben Treynor Sloss: by taking the approach that this was a software problem, the initial automation bought us enough time to turn cluster management into something autonomous, as opposed to automated. We achieved this goal by bringing ideas related to data distribution, APIs, hub-and-spoke architectures, and classic distributed system software development to bear upon the domain of infrastructure management.
An interesting analogy is possible here: we can make a direct mapping between the single machine case and the development of cluster management abstractions. In this view, rescheduling on another machine looks a lot like a process moving from one CPU to another: of course, those compute resources happen to be at the other end of a network link, but to what extent does that actually matter? Thinking in these terms, rescheduling looks like an intrinsic feature of the system rather than something one would "automate"-humans couldn't react fast enough anyway. Similarly in the case of cluster turnup: in this metaphor, cluster turnup is simply additional schedulable capacity, a bit like adding disk or RAM to a single computer. However, a single-node computer is not, in general, expected to continue operating when a large number of components fail. The global computer is-it must be self-repairing to operate once it grows past a certain size, due to the essentially statistically guaranteed large number of failures taking place every second. This implies that as we move systems up the hierarchy from manually triggered, to automatically triggered, to autonomous, some capacity for self-introspection is necessary to survive.

Reliability Is the Fundamental Feature
Of course, for effective troubleshooting, the details of internal operation that the introspection relies upon should also be exposed to the humans managing the overall system. Analogous discussions about the impact of automation in the noncomputer domain-for example, in airplane flight33 or industrial applications
-often point out the downside of highly effective automation:34 human operators are progressively more relieved of useful direct contact with the system as the automation covers more and more daily activities over time. Inevitably, then, a situation arises in which the automation fails, and the humans are now unable to successfully operate the system. The fluidity of their reactions has been lost due to lack of practice, and their mental models of what the system
should be doing no longer reflect the reality of what it is doing.35 This situation arises more when the system is nonautonomous-i.e., where automation replaces

manual actions, and the manual actions are presumed to be always performable and available just as they were before. Sadly, over time, this ultimately becomes false: those manual actions are not always performable because the functionalityto permit them no longer exists.
We, too, have experienced situations where automation has been actively harmful on a number of occasions-see Automation: Enabling Failure at Scale
-but in Google's experience, there are more systems for which automation or autonomous behavior are no longer optional extras. As you scale, this is of course the case, but there are still strong arguments for more autonomous behavior of systems irrespective of size. Reliability is the fundamental feature, and autonomous, resilient behavior is one useful way to get that.

Recommendations
You might read the examples in this chapter and decide that you need to be Google-scale before you have anything to do with automation whatsoever. This is untrue, for two reasons: automation provides more than just time saving, so it's worth implementing in more cases than a simple time-expended versus time- saved calculation might suggest. But the approach with the highest leverage actually occurs in the design phase: shipping and iterating rapidly might allow you to implement functionality faster, yet rarely makes for a resilient system. Autonomous operation is difficult to convincingly retrofit to sufficiently large systems, but standard good practices in software engineering will help considerably: having decoupled subsystems, introducing APIs, minimizing side effects, and so on.

Automation: Enabling Failure at Scale


Google runs over a dozen of its own large datacenters, but we also depend on machines in many third-party colocation facilities (or "colos"). Our machines in these colos are used to terminate most incoming connections, or as a cache for our own Content Delivery Network, in order to lower end-user latency. At any point in time, a number of these racks are being installed or decommissioned; both of these processes are largely automated. One step during decommission involves overwriting the full content of the disk of all the machines in the rack, after which point an independent system verifies the successful erase. We call this process "Diskerase."

Once upon a time, the automation in charge of decommissioning a particular rack failed, but only after the Diskerase step had completed successfully. Later, the decommission process was restarted from the beginning, to debug the failure. On that iteration, when trying to send the set of machines in the rack to Diskerase, the automation determined that the set of machines that still needed to be Diskerased was (correctly) empty. Unfortunately, the empty set was used as a special value, interpreted to mean "everything." This means the automation sent almost all the machines we have in all colos to Diskerase.
Within minutes, the highly efficient Diskerase wiped the disks on all machines in our CDN, and the machines were no longer able to terminate connections from users (or do anything else useful). We were still able to serve all the users from our own datacenters, and after a few minutes the only effect visible externally was a slight increase in latency. As far as we could tell, very few users noticed the problem at all, thanks to good capacity planning (at least we got that right!). Meanwhile, we spent the better part of two days reinstalling the machines in the affected colo racks; then we spent the following weeks auditing and adding more sanity checks-including rate limiting-into our automation, and making our decommission workflow idempotent.

26For readers who already feel they precisely understand the value of automation, skip ahead to The Value for Google SRE. However, note that our description contains some nuances that might be useful to keep in mind while reading the rest of the chapter.

27The expertise acquired in building such automation is also valuable in itself; engineers both deeply understand the existing processes they have automated and can later automate novel processes more quickly.

28See the following XKCD cartoon: http://xkcd.com/1205/.
29See, for example, http://blog.engineyard.com/2014/pets-vs-cattle.
30Of course, not every system that needs to be managed actually provides callable APIs for management-forcing some tooling to use, e.g., CLI invocations or automated website clicks.

31We have compressed and simplified this history to aid understanding.

32As in a small, unchanging number.
33See, e.g., https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Air_France_Flight_447.
34See, e.g., [Bai83] and [Sar97].
35This is yet another good reason for regular practice drills; see Disaster Role Playing.

Chapter 8 - Release Engineering
Written by Dinah McNutt
Edited by Betsy Beyer and Tim Harvey

Release engineering is a relatively new and fast-growing discipline of software engineering that can be concisely described as building and delivering software [McN14a]. Release engineers have a solid (if not expert) understanding of source code management, compilers, build configuration languages, automated build tools, package managers, and installers. Their skill set includes deep knowledge of multiple domains: development, configuration management, test integration, system administration, and customer support.
Running reliable services requires reliable release processes. Site Reliability Engineers (SREs) need to know that the binaries and configurations they use are built in a reproducible, automated way so that releases are repeatable and aren't "unique snowflakes." Changes to any aspect of the release process should be intentional, rather than accidental. SREs care about this process from source code to deployment.
Release engineering is a specific job function at Google. Release engineers work with software engineers (SWEs) in product development and SREs to define all the steps required to release software-from how the software is stored in the source code repository, to build rules for compilation, to how testing, packaging, and deployment are conducted.

The Role of a Release Engineer
Google is a data-driven company and release engineering follows suit. We have tools that report on a host of metrics, such as how much time it takes for a code change to be deployed into production (in other words, release velocity) and statistics on what features are being used in build configuration files [Ada15]. Most of these tools were envisioned and developed by release engineers.
Release engineers define best practices for using our tools in order to make sure projects are released using consistent and repeatable methodologies. Our best

practices cover all elements of the release process. Examples include compiler flags, formats for build identification tags, and required steps during a build. Making sure that our tools behave correctly by default and are adequately documented makes it easy for teams to stay focused on features and users, rather than spending time reinventing the wheel (poorly) when it comes to releasing software.
Google has a large number of SREs who are charged with safely deploying products and keeping Google services up and running. In order to make sure our release processes meet business requirements, release engineers and SREs work together to develop strategies for canarying changes, pushing out new releases without interrupting services, and rolling back features that demonstrate problems.

Philosophy
Release engineering is guided by an engineering and service philosophy that's expressed through four major principles, detailed in the following sections.

Self-Service Model

In order to work at scale, teams must be self-sufficient. Release engineering has developed best practices and tools that allow our product development teams to control and run their own release processes. Although we have thousands of engineers and products, we can achieve a high release velocity because individual teams can decide how often and when to release new versions of their products. Release processes can be automated to the point that they require minimal involvement by the engineers, and many projects are automatically built and released using a combination of our automated build system and our deployment tools. Releases are truly automatic, and only require engineer involvement if and when problems arise.

High Velocity

User-facing software (such as many components of Google Search) is rebuilt frequently, as we aim to roll out customer-facing features as quickly as possible. We have embraced the philosophy that frequent releases result in fewer changes between versions. This approach makes testing and troubleshooting easier. Some

teams perform hourly builds and then select the version to actually deploy to production from the resulting pool of builds. Selection is based upon the test results and the features contained in a given build. Other teams have adopted a "Push on Green" release model and deploy every build that passes all tests [Kle14].

Hermetic Builds

Build tools must allow us to ensure consistency and repeatability. If two people attempt to build the same product at the same revision number in the source code repository on different machines, we expect identical results.36 Our builds are hermetic, meaning that they are insensitive to the libraries and other software
installed on the build machine. Instead, builds depend on known versions of build tools, such as compilers, and dependencies, such as libraries. The build process is self-contained and must not rely on services that are external to the build environment.
Rebuilding older releases when we need to fix a bug in software that's running in production can be a challenge. We accomplish this task by rebuilding at the same revision as the original build and including specific changes that were submitted after that point in time. We call this tactic cherry picking. Our build tools are themselves versioned based on the revision in the source code repository for the project being built. Therefore, a project built last month won't use this month's version of the compiler if a cherry pick is required, because that version may contain incompatible or undesired features.

Enforcement of Policies and Procedures

Several layers of security and access control determine who can perform specific operations when releasing a project. Gated operations include:
Approving source code changes-this operation is managed through configuration files scattered throughout the codebase
Specifying the actions to be performed during the release process Creating a new release
Approving the initial integration proposal (which is a request to perform a build at a specific revision number in the source code repository) and subsequent cherry picks
Deploying a new release

Making changes to a project's build configuration

Almost all changes to the codebase require a code review, which is a streamlined action integrated into our normal developer workflow. Our automated release system produces a report of all changes contained in a release, which is archived with other build artifacts. By allowing SREs to understand what changes are included in a new release of a project, this report can expedite troubleshooting when there are problems with a release.

Continuous Build and Deployment
Google has developed an automated release system called Rapid. Rapid is a system that leverages a number of Google technologies to provide a framework that delivers scalable, hermetic, and reliable releases. The following sections describe the software lifecycle at Google and how it is managed using Rapid and other associated tools.

Building

Blaze37 is Google's build tool of choice. It supports building binaries from a range of languages, including our standard languages of C++, Java, Python, Go, and JavaScript. Engineers use Blaze to define build targets (e.g., the output of a build, such as a JAR file), and to specify the dependencies for each target [Kem11]. When performing a build, Blaze automatically builds the dependency targets.
Build targets for binaries and unit tests are defined in Rapid's project configuration files. Project-specific flags, such as a unique build identifier, are passed by Rapid to Blaze. All binaries support a flag that displays the build date, the revision number, and the build identifier, which allow us to easily associate a binary to a record of how it was built.

Branching

All code is checked into the main branch of the source code tree (mainline). However, most major projects don't release directly from the mainline. Instead, we branch from the mainline at a specific revision and never merge changes from the branch back into the mainline. Bug fixes are submitted to the mainline

and then cherry picked into the branch for inclusion in the release. This practice avoids inadvertently picking up unrelated changes submitted to the mainline since the original build occurred. Using this branch and cherry pick method, we know the exact contents of each release.

Testing

A continuous test system runs unit tests against the code in the mainline each time a change is submitted, allowing us to detect build and test failures quickly. Release engineering recommends that the continuous build test targets correspond to the same test targets that gate the project release. We also recommend creating releases at the revision number (version) of the last continuous test build that successfully completed all tests. These measures decrease the chance that subsequent changes made to the mainline will cause failures during the build performed at release time.
During the release process, we re-run the unit tests using the release branch and create an audit trail showing that all the tests passed. This step is important because if a release involves cherry picks, the release branch may contain a version of the code that doesn't exist anywhere on the mainline. We want to guarantee that the tests pass in the context of what's actually being released.
To complement the continuous test system, we use an independent testing environment that runs system-level tests on packaged build artifacts. These tests can be launched manually or from Rapid.

Packaging

Software is distributed to our production machines via the Midas Package Manager (MPM) [McN14c]. MPM assembles packages based on Blaze rules that list the build artifacts to include, along with their owners and permissions. Packages are named (e.g., search/shakespeare/frontend), versioned with a unique hash, and signed to ensure authenticity. MPM supports applying labels to a particular version of a package. Rapid applies a label containing the build ID, which guarantees that a package can be uniquely referenced using the name of the package and this label.
Labels can be applied to an MPM package to indicate a package's location in the release process (e.g., dev, canary, or production). If you apply an existing label

to a new package, the label is automatically moved from the old package to the new package. For example: if a package is labeled as canary, someone subsequently installing the canary version of that package will automatically receive the newest version of the package with the label canary.

Rapid

Figure 8-1 shows the main components of the Rapid system. Rapid is configured with files called blueprints. Blueprints are written in an internal configuration language and are used to define build and test targets, rules for deployment, and administrative information (like project owners). Role-based access control lists determine who can perform specific actions on a Rapid project.

Figure 8-1. Simplified view of Rapid architecture showing the main components of the system
Each Rapid project has workflows that define the actions to perform during the release process. Workflow actions can be performed serially or in parallel, and a workflow can launch other workflows. Rapid dispatches work requests to tasks running as a Borg job on our production servers. Because Rapid uses our production infrastructure, it can handle thousands of release requests simultaneously.

A typical release process proceeds as follows:

1. Rapid uses the requested integration revision number (often obtained automatically from our continuous test system) to create a release branch.
2. Rapid uses Blaze to compile all the binaries and execute the unit tests, often performing these two steps in parallel. Compilation and testing occur in environments dedicated to those specific tasks, as opposed to taking place in the Borg job where the Rapid workflow is executing. This separation allows us to parallelize work easily.
3. Build artifacts are then available for system testing and canary deployments. A typical canary deployment involves starting a few jobs in our production environment after the completion of system tests.
4. The results of each step of the process are logged. A report of all changes since the last release is created.
Rapid allows us to manage our release branches and cherry picks; individual cherry pick requests can be approved or rejected for inclusion in a release.

Deployment

Rapid is often used to drive simple deployments directly. It updates the Borg jobs to use newly built MPM packages based on deployment definitions in the blueprint files and specialized task executors.
For more complicated deployments, we use Sisyphus, which is a general- purpose rollout automation framework developed by SRE. A rollout is a logical unit of work that is composed of one or more individual tasks. Sisyphus provides a set of Python classes that can be extended to support any deployment process. It has a dashboard that allows for finer control on how the rollout is performed and provides a way to monitor the rollout's progress.
In a typical integration, Rapid creates a rollout in a long-running Sisyphus job. Rapid knows the build label associated with the MPM package it created, and can specify that build label when creating the rollout in Sisyphus. Sisyphus uses the build label to specify which version of the MPM packages should be deployed.
With Sisyphus, the rollout process can be as simple or complicated as necessary. For example, it can update all the associated jobs immediately or it can roll out a

new binary to successive clusters over a period of several hours.

Our goal is to fit the deployment process to the risk profile of a given service. In development or pre-production environments, we may build hourly and push releases automatically when all tests pass. For large user-facing services, we may push by starting in one cluster and expand exponentially until all clusters are updated. For sensitive pieces of infrastructure, we may extend the rollout over several days, interleaving them across instances in different geographic regions.

Configuration Management
Configuration management is one area of particularly close collaboration between release engineers and SREs. Although configuration management may initially seem a deceptively simple problem, configuration changes are a potential source of instability. As a result, our approach to releasing and managing system and service configurations has evolved substantially over time. Today we use several models for distributing configuration files, as described in the following paragraphs. All schemes involve storing configuration in our primary source code repository and enforcing a strict code review requirement.
Use the mainline for configuration. This was the first method used to configure services in Borg (and the systems that pre-dated Borg). Using this scheme, developers and SREs modify configuration files at the head of the main branch. The changes are reviewed and then applied to the running system. As a result, binary releases and configuration changes are decoupled. While conceptually and procedurally simple, this technique often leads to skew between the checked-in version of the configuration files and the running version of the configuration file because jobs must be updated in order to pick up the changes.
Include configuration files and binaries in the same MPM package. For projects with few configuration files or projects where the files (or a subset of files) change with each release cycle, the configuration files can be included in the MPM package with the binaries. While this strategy limits flexibility by binding the binary and configuration files tightly, it simplifies deployment, because it only requires installing one package.
Package configuration files into MPM "configuration packages." We can apply the hermetic principle to configuration management. Binary configurations tend

to be tightly bound to particular versions of binaries, so we leverage the build and packaging systems to snapshot and release configuration files alongside their binaries. Similar to our treatment of binaries, we can use the build ID to reconstruct the configuration at a specific point in time.
For example, a change that implements a new feature can be released with a flag setting that configures that feature. By generating two MPM packages, one for the binary and one for the configuration, we retain the ability to change each package independently. That is, if the feature was released with a flag setting of first_folio but we realize it should instead be bad_quarto, we can cherry pick that change onto the release branch, rebuild the configuration package, and deploy it. This approach has the advantage of not requiring a new binary build.

We can leverage MPM's labeling feature to indicate which versions of MPM packages should be installed together. A label of much_ado can be applied to the MPM packages described in the previous paragraph, which allows us to fetch both packages using this label. When a new version of the project is built, the much_ado label will be applied to the new packages. Because these tags are unique within the namespace for an MPM package, only the latest package with that tag will be used.

Read configuration files from an external store. Some projects have configuration files that need to change frequently or dynamically (i.e., while the binary is running). These files can be stored in Chubby, Bigtable, or our source- based filesystem [Yor11].
In summary, project owners consider the different options for distributing and managing configuration files and decide which works best on a case-by-case basis.

Conclusions
While this chapter has specifically discussed Google's approach to release engineering and the ways in which release engineers work and collaborate with SREs, these practices can also be applied more widely.

It's Not Just for Googlers

When  equipped  with  the  right  tools,  proper  automation,  and  well-defined

policies, developers and SREs shouldn't have to worry about releasing software. Releases can be as painless as simply pressing a button.
Most companies deal with the same set of release engineering problems regardless of their size or the tools they use: How should you handle versioning of your packages? Should you use a continuous build and deploy model, or perform periodic builds? How often should you release? What configuration management policies should you use? What release metrics are of interest?
Google Release Engineers have developed our own tools out of necessity because open sourced or vendor-supplied tools don't work at the scale we require. Custom tools allow us to include functionality to support (and even enforce) release process policies. However, these policies must first be defined in order to add appropriate features to our tools, and all companies should take the effort to define their release processes whether or not the processes can be automated and/or enforced.

Start Release Engineering at the Beginning

Release engineering has often been an afterthought, and this way of thinking must change as platforms and services continue to grow in size and complexity.
Teams should budget for release engineering resources at the beginning of the product development cycle. It's cheaper to put good practices and process in place early, rather than have to retrofit your system later.
It is essential that the developers, SREs, and release engineers work together. The release engineer needs to understand the intention of how the code should be built and deployed. The developers shouldn't build and "throw the results over the fence" to be handled by the release engineers.
Individual project teams decide when release engineering becomes involved in a project. Because release engineering is still a relatively young discipline, managers don't always plan and budget for release engineering in the early stages of a project. Therefore, when considering how to incorporate release engineering practices, be sure that you consider its role as applied to the entire lifecycle of your product or service-particularly the early stages.

More Information

For more information on release engineering, see the following presentations, each of which has video available online:
How	Embracing	Continuous	Release	Reduced	Change	Complexity, USENIX Release Engineering Summit West 2014, [Dic14]
Maintaining	Consistency	in	a	Massively	Parallel	Environment, USENIXConfiguration Management Summit 2013, [McN13]
The	10	Commandments	of	Release	Engineering,	2nd	International Workshop on Release Engineering 2014, [McN14b]
Distributing Software in a Massively Parallel Environment, LISA 2014, [McN14c]

36Google uses a monolithic unified source code repository; see [Pot16].
37Blaze has been open sourced as Bazel. See "Bazel FAQ" on the Bazel website,
http://bazel.io/faq.html.

Chapter 9 - Simplicity
Written by Max Luebbe Edited by Tim Harvey
The price of reliability is the pursuit of the utmost simplicity.

C.A.R. Hoare, Turing Award lecture

Software systems are inherently dynamic and unstable.38 A software system can only be perfectly stable if it exists in a vacuum. If we stop changing the codebase, we stop introducing bugs. If the underlying hardware or libraries never change, neither of these components will introduce bugs. If we freeze the current user base, we'll never have to scale the system. In fact, a good summary of the SRE approach to managing systems is: "At the end of the day, our job is
to keep agility and stability in balance in the system."39

System Stability Versus Agility
It sometimes makes sense to sacrifice stability for the sake of agility. I've often approached an unfamiliar problem domain by conducting what I call exploratory coding-setting an explicit shelf life for whatever code I write with the understanding that I'll need to try and fail once in order to really understand the task I need to accomplish. Code that comes with an expiration date can be much more liberal with test coverage and release management because it will never be shipped to production or be seen by users.
For the majority of production software systems, we want a balanced mix of stability and agility. SREs work to create procedures, practices, and tools that render software more reliable. At the same time, SREs ensure that this work has as little impact on developer agility as possible. In fact, SRE's experience has found that reliable processes tend to actually increase developer agility: rapid, reliable production rollouts make changes in production easier to see. As a result, once a bug surfaces, it takes less time to find and fix that bug. Building reliability into development allows developers to focus their attention on what we really do care about-the functionality and performance of their software and

systems.

The Virtue of Boring
Unlike just about everything else in life, "boring" is actually a positive attribute when it comes to software! We don't want our programs to be spontaneous and interesting; we want them to stick to the script and predictably accomplish their business goals. In the words of Google engineer Robert Muth, "Unlike a detective story, the lack of excitement, suspense, and puzzles is actually a desirable property of source code." Surprises in production are the nemeses of SRE.
As Fred Brooks suggests in his "No Silver Bullet" essay [Bro95], it is very important to consider the difference between essential complexity and accidental complexity. Essential complexity is the complexity inherent in a given situation that cannot be removed from a problem definition, whereas accidental complexity is more fluid and can be resolved with engineering effort. For example, writing a web server entails dealing with the essential complexity of serving web pages quickly. However, if we write a web server in Java, we may introduce accidental complexity when trying to minimize the performance impact of garbage collection.
With an eye towards minimizing accidental complexity, SRE teams should:

Push back when accidental complexity is introduced into the systems for which they are responsible
Constantly strive to eliminate complexity in systems they onboard and for which they assume operational responsibility

I Won't Give Up My Code!
Because engineers are human beings who often form an emotional attachment to their creations, confrontations over large-scale purges of the source tree are not uncommon. Some might protest, "What if we need that code later?" "Why don't we just comment the code out so we can easily add it again later?" or "Why don't we gate the code with a flag instead of deleting it?" These are all terrible suggestions. Source control systems make it easy to reverse changes, whereas hundreds  of  lines  of  commented  code  create  distractions  and  confusion

(especially as the source files continue to evolve), and code that is never executed, gated by a flag that is always disabled, is a metaphorical time bomb waiting to explode, as painfully experienced by Knight Capital, for example (see "Order In the Matter of Knight Capital Americas LLC" [Sec13]).
At the risk of sounding extreme, when you consider a web service that's expected to be available 24/7, to some extent, every new line of code written is a liability. SRE promotes practices that make it more likely that all code has an essential purpose, such as scrutinizing code to make sure that it actually drives business goals, routinely removing dead code, and building bloat detection into all levels of testing.

The "Negative Lines of Code" Metric
The term "software bloat" was coined to describe the tendency of software to become slower and bigger over time as a result of a constant stream of additional features. While bloated software seems intuitively undesirable, its negative aspects become even more clear when considered from the SRE perspective: every line of code changed or added to a project creates the potential for introducing new defects and bugs. A smaller project is easier to understand, easier to test, and frequently has fewer defects. Bearing this perspective in mind, we should perhaps entertain reservations when we have the urge to add new features to a project. Some of the most satisfying coding I've ever done was deleting thousands of lines of code at a time when it was no longer useful.

Minimal APIs
French poet Antoine de Saint Exupery wrote, "perfection is finally attained not when there is no longer more to add, but when there is no longer anything to take away" [Sai39]. This principle is also applicable to the design and construction of software. APIs are a particularly clear expression of why this rule should be followed.
Writing clear, minimal APIs is an essential aspect of managing simplicity in a software system. The fewer methods and arguments we provide to consumers of the API, the easier that API will be to understand, and the more effort we can devote to making those methods as good as they can possibly be. Again, a recurring theme appears: the conscious decision to not take on certain problems

allows us to focus on our core problem and make the solutions we explicitly set out to create substantially better. In software, less is more! A small, simple API is usually also a hallmark of a well-understood problem.

Modularity
Expanding outward from APIs and single binaries, many of the rules of thumb that apply to object-oriented programming also apply to the design of distributed systems. The ability to make changes to parts of the system in isolation is essential to creating a supportable system. Specifically, loose coupling between binaries, or between binaries and configuration, is a simplicity pattern that simultaneously promotes developer agility and system stability. If a bug is discovered in one program that is a component of a larger system, that bug can be fixed and pushed to production independent of the rest of the system.
While the modularity that APIs offer may seem straightforward, it is not so apparent that the notion of modularity also extends to how changes to APIs are introduced. Just a single change to an API can force developers to rebuild their entire system and run the risk of introducing new bugs. Versioning APIs allows developers to continue to use the version that their system depends upon while they upgrade to a newer version in a safe and considered way. The release cadence can vary throughout a system, instead of requiring a full production push of the entire system every time a feature is added or improved.
As a system grows more complex, the separation of responsibility between APIs and between binaries becomes increasingly important. This is a direct analogy to object-oriented class design: just as it is understood that it is poor practice to write a "grab bag" class that contains unrelated functions, it is also poor practice to create and put into production a "util" or "misc" binary. A well-designed distributed system consists of collaborators, each of which has a clear and well- scoped purpose.
The concept of modularity also applies to data formats. One of the central strengths and design goals of Google's protocol buffers40 was to create a wire format that was backward and forward compatible.

Release Simplicity

Simple releases are generally better than complicated releases. It is much easier to measure and understand the impact of a single change rather than a batch of changes released simultaneously. If we release 100 unrelated changes to a system at the same time and performance gets worse, understanding which changes impacted performance, and how they did so, will take considerable effort or additional instrumentation. If the release is performed in smaller batches, we can move faster with more confidence because each code change can be understood in isolation in the larger system. This approach to releases can be compared to gradient descent in machine learning, in which we find an optimum solution by taking small steps at a time, and considering if each change results in an improvement or degradation.

A Simple Conclusion
This chapter has repeated one theme over and over: software simplicity is a prerequisite to reliability. We are not being lazy when we consider how we might simplify each step of a given task. Instead, we are clarifying what it is we actually want to accomplish and how we might most easily do so. Every time we say "no" to a feature, we are not restricting innovation; we are keeping the environment uncluttered of distractions so that focus remains squarely on innovation, and real engineering can proceed.

38This is often true of complex systems in general; see [Per99] and [Coo00].
39Coined by my former manager, Johan Anderson, around the time I became an SRE.

40Protocol buffers, also referred to as "protobufs," are a language-neutral, platform-neutral extensible mechanism for serializing structured data. For more details, see https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/overview#a-bit- of-history.

Part III - Practices
Put simply, SREs run services-a set of related systems, operated for users, who may be internal or external-and are ultimately responsible for the health of these services. Successfully operating a service entails a wide range of activities: developing monitoring systems, planning capacity, responding to incidents, ensuring the root causes of outages are addressed, and so on. This section addresses the theory and practice of an SRE's day-to-day activity: building and operating large distributed computing systems.
We can characterize the health of a service-in much the same way that Abraham Maslow categorized human needs [Mas43]-from the most basic requirements needed for a system to function as a service at all to the higher levels of function-permitting self-actualization and taking active control of the direction of the service rather than reactively fighting fires. This understanding is so fundamental to how we evaluate services at Google that it wasn't explicitly developed until a number of Google SREs, including our former colleague
Mikey Dickerson,41 temporarily joined the radically different culture of the United States government to help with the launch of healthcare.gov in late 2013 and early 2014: they needed a way to explain how to increase systems' reliability.
We'll use this hierarchy, illustrated in Figure 3-1, to look at the elements that go into making a service reliable, from most basic to most advanced.


Figure III-1. Service Reliability Hierarchy Monitoring
Without monitoring, you have no way to tell whether the service is even working; absent a thoughtfully designed monitoring infrastructure, you're flying blind. Maybe everyone who tries to use the website gets an error, maybe not- but you want to be aware of problems before your users notice them. We discuss tools and philosophy in Practical Alerting from Time-Series Data.
Incident Response

SREs don't go on-call merely for the sake of it: rather, on-call support is a tool we use to achieve our larger mission and remain in touch with how distributed computing systems actually work (and fail!). If we could find a way to relieve

ourselves of carrying a pager, we would. In Being On-Call, we explain how we balance on-call duties with our other responsibilities.
Once you're aware that there is a problem, how do you make it go away? That doesn't necessarily mean fixing it once and for all-maybe you can stop the bleeding by reducing the system's precision or turning off some features temporarily, allowing it to gracefully degrade, or maybe you can direct traffic to another instance of the service that's working properly. The details of the solution you choose to implement are necessarily specific to your service and your organization. Responding effectively to incidents, however, is something applicable to all teams.
Figuring out what's wrong is the first step; we offer a structured approach in Effective Troubleshooting.
During an incident, it's often tempting to give in to adrenalin and start responding ad hoc. We advise against this temptation in Emergency Response, and counsel in Managing Incidents, that managing incidents effectively should reduce their impact and limit outage-induced anxiety.
Postmortem and Root-Cause Analysis

We aim to be alerted on and manually solve only new and exciting problems presented by our service; it's woefully boring to "fix" the same issue over and over. In fact, this mindset is one of the key differentiators between the SRE philosophy and some more traditional operations-focused environments. This theme is explored in two chapters.
Building a blameless postmortem culture is the first step in understanding what went wrong (and what went right!), as described in Postmortem Culture: Learning from Failure.
Related to that discussion, in Tracking Outages, we briefly describe an internal tool, the outage tracker, that allows SRE teams to keep track of recent production incidents, their causes, and actions taken in response to them.
Testing

Once we understand what tends to go wrong, our next step is attempting to prevent it, because an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. Test suites

offer some assurance that our software isn't making certain classes of errors before it's released to production; we talk about how best to use these in Testing for Reliability.
Capacity Planning

In Software Engineering in SRE, we offer a case study of software engineering in SRE with Auxon, a tool for automating capacity planning.
Naturally following capacity planning, load balancing ensures we're properly using the capacity we've built. We discuss how requests to our services get sent to datacenters in Load Balancing at the Frontend. Then we continue the discussion in Load Balancing in the Datacenter and Handling Overload, both of which are essential for ensuring service reliability.
Finally, in Addressing Cascading Failures, we offer advice for addressing cascading failures, both in system design and should your service be caught in a cascading failure.
Development

One of the key aspects of Google's approach to Site Reliability Engineering is that we do significant large-scale system design and software engineering work within the organization.
In Managing Critical State: Distributed Consensus for Reliability, we explain distributed consensus, which (in the guise of Paxos) is at the core of many of Google's distributed systems, including our globally distributed Cron system. In Distributed Periodic Scheduling with Cron, we outline a system that scales to whole datacenters and beyond, which is no easy task.
Data Processing Pipelines, discusses the various forms that data processing pipelines can take: from one-shot MapReduce jobs running periodically to systems that operate in near real-time. Different architectures can lead to surprising and counterintuitive challenges.
Making sure that the data you stored is still there when you want to read it is the heart of data integrity; in Data Integrity: What You Read Is What You Wrote, we explain how to keep data safe.

Product

Finally, having made our way up the reliability pyramid, we find ourselves at the point of having a workable product. In Reliable Product Launches at Scale, we write about how Google does reliable product launches at scale to try to give users the best possible experience starting from Day Zero.
Further Reading from Google SRE

As discussed previously, testing is subtle, and its improper execution can have large effects on overall stability. In an ACM article [Kri12], we explain how Google performs company-wide resilience testing to ensure we're capable of weathering the unexpected should a zombie apocalypse or other disaster strike.
While it's often thought of as a dark art, full of mystifying spreadsheets divining the future, capacity planning is nonetheless vital, and as [Hix15a] shows, you don't actually need a crystal ball to do it right.
Finally, an interesting and new approach to corporate network security is detailed in [War14], an initiative to replace privileged intranets with device and user credentials. Driven by SREs at the infrastructure level, this is definitely an approach to keep in mind when you're creating your next network.