Chapter 10 - Practical Alerting
Written by Jamie Wilkinson Edited by Kavita Guliani
May the queries flow, and the pager stay silent. Traditional SRE blessing
Monitoring, the bottom layer of the Hierarchy of Production Needs, is fundamental to running a stable service. Monitoring enables service owners to make rational decisions about the impact of changes to the service, apply the scientific method to incident response, and of course ensure their reason for existence: to measure the service's alignment with business goals (see Monitoring Distributed Systems).
Regardless of whether or not a service enjoys SRE support, it should be run in a symbiotic relationship with its monitoring. But having been tasked with ultimate responsibility for Google Production, SREs develop a particularly intimate knowledge of the monitoring infrastructure that supports their service.
Monitoring a very large system is challenging for a couple of reasons: The sheer number of components being analyze
The  need  to  maintain  a  reasonably  low  maintenance  burden  on  the
engineers responsible for the system

Google's monitoring systems don't just measure simple metrics, such as the average response time of an unladen European web server; we also need to understand the distribution of those response times across all web servers in that region. This knowledge enables us to identify the factors contributing to the latency tail.
At the scale our systems operate, being alerted for single-machine failures is unacceptable because such data is too noisy to be actionable. Instead we try to build systems that are robust against failures in the systems they depend on. Rather than requiring management of many individual components, a large

system should be designed to aggregate signals and prune outliers. We need monitoring systems that allow us to alert for high-level service objectives, but retain the granularity to inspect individual components as needed.
Google's monitoring systems evolved over the course of 10 years from the traditional model of custom scripts that check responses and alert, wholly separated from visual display of trends, to a new paradigm. This new model made the collection of time-series a first-class role of the monitoring system, and replaced those check scripts with a rich language for manipulating time-series into charts and alerts.

The Rise of Borgmon
Shortly after the job scheduling infrastructure Borg [Ver15] was created in 2003, a new monitoring system-Borgmon-was built to complement it.

Time-Series Monitoring Outside of Google


This chapter describes the architecture and programming interface of an internal monitoring tool that was foundational for the growth and reliability of Google for almost 10 years...but how does that help you, our dear reader?
In recent years, monitoring has undergone a Cambrian Explosion: Riemann, Heka, Bosun, and Prometheus have emerged as open source tools that are very similar to Borgmon's time-series-based alerting. In particular, Prometheus42 shares many similarities with Borgmon, especially when you compare the two
rule languages. The principles of variable collection and rule evaluation remain the same across all these tools and provide an environment with which you can experiment, and hopefully launch into production, the ideas inspired by this chapter.
Instead of executing custom scripts to detect system failures, Borgmon relies on a common data exposition format; this enables mass data collection with low overheads and avoids the costs of subprocess execution and network connection setup. We call this white-box monitoring (see Monitoring Distributed Systems for a comparison of white-box and black-box monitoring).
The data is used both for rendering charts and creating alerts, which are accomplished using simple arithmetic. Because collection is no longer in a short-

lived process, the history of the collected data can be used for that alert computation as well.
These features help to meet the goal of simplicity described in Monitoring Distributed Systems. They allow the system overhead to be kept low so that the people running the services can remain agile and respond to continuous change in the system as it grows.
To facilitate mass collection, the metrics format had to be standardized. An older method of exporting the internal state (known as varz)43 was formalized to allow the collection of all metrics from a single target in one HTTP fetch. For example, to view a page of metrics manually, you could use the following command:

% curl http://webserver:80/varz http_requests 37 errors_total 12

A Borgmon can collect from other Borgmon,44 so we can build hierarchies that follow the topology of the service, aggregating and summarizing information and discarding some strategically at each level. Typically, a team runs a single Borgmon per cluster, and a pair at the global level. Some very large services shard below the cluster level into many scraper Borgmon, which in turn feed to the cluster-level Borgmon.

Instrumentation of Applications
The /varz HTTP handler simply lists all the exported variables in plain text, as space-separated keys and values, one per line. A later extension added a mapped variable, which allows the exporter to define several labels on a variable name, and then export a table of values or a histogram. An example map-valued variable looks like the following, showing 25 HTTP 200 responses and 12 HTTP 500s:

http_responses map:code 200:25 404:0 500:12

Adding a metric to a program only requires a single declaration in the code where the metric is needed.
In hindsight, it's apparent that this schemaless textual interface makes the barrier to adding new instrumentation very low, which is a positive for both the

software engineering and SRE teams. However, this has a trade-off against ongoing maintenance; the decoupling of the variable definition from its use in Borgmon rules requires careful change management. In practice, this trade-off has been satisfactory because tools to validate and generate rules have been
written as well.45

Exporting Variables


Google's web roots run deep: each of the major languages used at Google has an implementation of the exported variable interface that automagically registers with the HTTP server built into every Google binary by default.46 The instances of the variable to be exported allow the server author to perform obvious
operations like adding an amount to the current value, setting a key to a specific value, and so forth. The Go expvar library47 and its JSON output form have a variant of this API.

Collection of Exported Data
To find its targets, a Borgmon instance is configured with a list of targets using one of many name resolution methods.48 The target list is often dynamic, so using service discovery reduces the cost of maintaining it and allows the monitoring to scale.
At predefined intervals, Borgmon fetches the /varz URI on each target, decodes the results, and stores the values in memory. Borgmon also spreads the collection from each instance in the target list over the whole interval, so that collection from each target is not in lockstep with its peers.
Borgmon also records "synthetic" variables for each target in order to identify: If the name was resolved to a host and port
If the target responded to a collection
If the target responded to a health check What time the collection finished
These synthetic variables make it easy to write rules to detect if the monitored tasks are unavailable.

It's interesting that varz is quite dissimilar to SNMP (Simple Network Management Protocol), which "is designed [...] to have minimal transport requirements and to continue working when most other network applications fail" [Mic03]. Scraping targets over HTTP seems to be at odds with this design
principle; however, experience shows that this is rarely an issue.49 The system itself is already designed to be robust against network and machine failures, and Borgmon allows engineers to write smarter alerting rules by using the collection failure itself as a signal.

Storage in the Time-Series Arena
A service is typically made up of many binaries running as many tasks, on many machines, in many clusters. Borgmon needs to keep all that data organized, while allowing flexible querying and slicing of that data.
Borgmon stores all the data in an in-memory database, regularly checkpointed to disk. The data points have the form (timestamp, value), and are stored in chronological lists called time-series, and each time-series is named by a unique set of labels, of the form name=value.
As presented in Figure 10-1, a time-series is conceptually a one-dimensional matrix of numbers, progressing through time. As you add permutations of labels to this time-series, the matrix becomes multidimensional.



Figure 10-1. A time-series for errors labeled by the original host each was collected from
In practice, the structure is a fixed-sized block of memory, known as the time- series arena, with a garbage collector that expires the oldest entries once the arena is full. The time interval between the most recent and oldest entries in the arena is the horizon, which indicates how much queryable data is kept in RAM. Typically, datacenter and global Borgmon are sized to hold about 12 hours of
data50 for rendering consoles, and much less time if they are the lowest-level collector shards. The memory requirement for a single data point is about 24 bytes, so we can fit 1 million unique time-series for 12 hours at 1-minute intervals in under 17 GB of RAM.
Periodically, the in-memory state is archived to an external system known as the Time-Series Database (TSDB). Borgmon can query TSDB for older data and, while slower, TSDB is cheaper and larger than a Borgmon's RAM.

Labels and Vectors

As shown in the example time-series in Figure 10-2, time-series are stored as sequences of numbers and timestamps, which are referred to as vectors. Like vectors in linear algebra, these vectors are slices and cross-sections of the multidimensional matrix of data points in the arena. Conceptually the timestamps can be ignored, because the values are inserted in the vector at regular intervals in time-for example, 1 or 10 seconds or 1 minute apart.


Figure 10-2. An example time-series

The name of a time-series is a labelset, because it's implemented as a set of labels expressed as key=value pairs. One of these labels is the variable name itself, the key that appears on the varz page.

A few label names are declared as important. For the time-series in the time- series database to be identifiable, it must at minimum have the following labels:

var


The name of the variable



job


The name given to the type of server being monitored


service

A loosely defined collection of jobs that provide a service to users, either internal or external


zone



A Google convention that refers to the location (typically the datacenter) of the Borgmon that performed the collection of this variable


Together,  these  variables  appear  something  like  the  following,  called  the
variable expression:

{var=http_requests,job=webserver,instance=host0:80,service=web,zone

A query for a time-series does not require specification of all these labels, and a search for a labelset returns all matching time-series in a vector. So we could return a vector of results by removing the instance label in the preceding query, if there were more than one instance in the cluster. For example:

{var=http_requests,job=webserver,service=web,zone=us-west}

might have a result of five rows in a vector, with the most recent value in the time-series like so:

{var=http_requests,job=webserver,instance=host0:80,service=web,zo
{var=http_requests,job=webserver,instance=host1:80,service=w
{var=http_requests,job=webserver,instance=host2:80,service=w
{var=http_requests,job=webserver,instance=host3:80,service=w
{var=http_requests,job=webserver,instance=host4:80,service=w


Labels can be added to a time-series from:

The target's name, e.g., the job and instance

The target itself, e.g., via map-valued variables
The Borgmon configuration, e.g., annotations about location or relabeling The Borgmon rules being evaluated
We can also query time-series in time, by specifying a duration to the variable expression:

{var=http_requests,job=webserver,service=web,zone=us-west}[10m]

This returns the last 10 minutes of history of the time-series that matched the expression. If we were collecting data points once per minute, we would expect to return 10 data points in a 10-minute window, like so:51

{var=http_requests,job=webserver,instance=host0:80,
...}
0
1
{var=http_requests,job=webserver,instance=host1:80,
...}
0
1
{var=http_requests,job=webserver,instance=host2:80,
...}
0
1
{var=http_requests,job=webserver,instance=host3:80,
...}
0
0
{var=http_requests,job=webserver,instance=host4:80,
...}
0
1

Rule Evaluation
Borgmon is really just a programmable calculator, with some syntactic sugar that enables it to generate alerts. The data collection and storage components already described are just necessary evils to make that programmable calculator ultimately fit for purpose here as a monitoring system. :)

Note


Centralizing the rule evaluation in a monitoring system, rather than delegating it to forked subprocesses, means that computations can run in parallel against many similar targets. This practice keeps the configuration relatively small in size (for example, by removing duplication of code) yet more powerful through its expressiveness.
The Borgmon program code, also known as Borgmon rules, consists of simple algebraic expressions that compute time-series from other time-series. These rules can be quite powerful because they can query the history of a single time- series (i.e., the time axis), query different subsets of labels from many time- series at once (i.e., the space axis), and apply many mathematical operations.

Rules run in a parallel threadpool where possible, but are dependent on ordering when using previously defined rules as input. The size of the vectors returned by their query expressions also determines the overall runtime of a rule. Thus, it is typically the case that one can add CPU resources to a Borgmon task in response to it running slow. To assist more detailed analysis, internal metrics on the runtime of rules are exported for performance debugging and for monitoring the monitoring.
Aggregation is the cornerstone of rule evaluation in a distributed environment. Aggregation entails taking the sum of a set of time-series from the tasks in a job in order to treat the job as a whole. From those sums, overall rates can be computed. For example, the total queries-per-second rate of a job in a datacenter
is the sum of all the rates of change52 of all the query counters.53

Tip


A counter is any monotonically non-decreasing variable-which is to say, counters only increase in value. Gauges, on the other hand, may take any value they like. Counters measure increasing values, such as the total number of kilometers driven, while gauges show current state, such as the amount of fuel remaining or current speed. When collecting Borgmon-style data, it's better to use counters, because they don't lose meaning when events occur between sampling intervals. Should any activity or changes occur between sampling intervals, a gauge collection is likely to miss that activity.
For an example web server, we might want to alert when our web server cluster starts to serve more errors as a percent of requests than we think is normal-or more technically, when the sum of the rates of non-HTTP-200 return codes on all tasks in the cluster, divided by the sum of the rates of requests to all tasks in that cluster, is greater than some value.
This is accomplished by:

1. Aggregating the rates of response codes across all tasks, outputting a vector of rates at that point in time, one for each code.
2. Computing the total error rate as the sum of that vector, outputting a single value for the cluster at that point in time. This total error rate excludes the 200 code from the sum, because it is not an error.
3. Computing the cluster-wide ratio of errors to requests, dividing the total

error rate by the rate of requests that arrived, and again outputting a single value for the cluster at that point in time.
Each of these outputs at a point in time gets appended to its named variable expression, which creates the new time-series. As a result, we will be able to inspect the history of error rates and error ratios some other time.
The rate of requests rules would be written in Borgmon's rule language as the following:

rules <<<
# Compute the rate of requests for each task from the count of
{var=task:http_requests:rate10m,job=webserver} = rate({var=http_requests,job=webserver}[10m]);

# Sum the rates to get the aggregate rate of queries for the c # 'without instance' instructs Borgmon to remove the instance # from the right hand side.
{var=dc:http_requests:rate10m,job=webserver} =
sum without instance({var=task:http_requests:rate10m,job=web
>>>

The rate() function takes the enclosed expression and returns the total delta divided by the total time between the earliest and latest values.

With the example time-series data from the query before, the results for the
task:http_requests:rate10m rule would look like:54

{var=task:http_requests:rate10m,job=webserver,instance=host0:8
{var=task:http_requests:rate10m,job=webserver,instance=host1:8
{var=task:http_requests:rate10m,job=webserver,instance=host2:8
{var=task:http_requests:rate10m,job=webserver,instance=host3:8
{var=task:http_requests:rate10m,job=webserver,instance=host4:8


and the results for the dc:http_requests:rate10m rule would be:

{var=dc:http_requests:rate10m,job=webserver,service=web,zone=u

because the second rule uses the first one as input.

Note

The instance label is missing in the output now, discarded by the aggregation rule. If it had remained in the rule, then Borgmon would not have been able to sum the five rows together.

In these examples, we use a time window because we're dealing with discrete points in the time-series, as opposed to continuous functions. Doing so makes the rate calculation easier than performing calculus, but means that to compute a rate, we need to select a sufficient number of data points. We also have to deal with the possibility that some recent collections have failed. Recall that the historical variable expression notation uses the range [10m] to avoid missing data points caused by collection errors.

The example also uses a Google convention that helps readability. Each computed variable name contains a colon-separated triplet indicating the aggregation level, the variable name, and the operation that created that name. In this example, the lefthand variables are "task HTTP requests 10-minute rate" and "datacenter HTTP requests 10-minute rate."
Now that we know how to create a rate of queries, we can build on that to also compute a rate of errors, and then we can calculate the ratio of responses to requests to understand how much useful work the service is doing. We can compare the ratio rate of errors to our service level objective (see Service Level Objectives) and alert if this objective is missed or in danger of being missed:

rules <<<
# Compute a rate pertask and per 'code' label
{var=task:http_responses:rate10m,job=webserver} =
rate by code({var=http_responses,job=webserver}[10m]);

# Compute a cluster level response rate per 'code' label
{var=dc:http_responses:rate10m,job=webserver} =
sum without instance({var=task:http_responses:rate10m,job=we

# Compute a new cluster level rate summing all non 200 codes
{var=dc:http_errors:rate10m,job=webserver} =
sum without code({var=dc:http_responses:rate10m,job=webserve

# Compute the ratio of the rate of errors to the rate of reque
{var=dc:http_errors:ratio_rate10m,job=webserver} =
{var=dc:http_errors:rate10m,job=webserver}
/
{var=dc:http_requests:rate10m,job=webserver};

>>>

Again, this calculation demonstrates the convention of suffixing the new time- series variable name with the operation that created it. This result is read as "datacenter HTTP errors 10 minute ratio of rates."

The output of these rules might look like:55

{var=task:http_responses:rate10m,job=webserver}

{var=task:http_responses:rate10m,job=webserver,code=200,instan
{var=task:http_responses:rate10m,job=webserver,code=500,instan
{var=task:http_responses:rate10m,job=webserver,code=200,instan
{var=task:http_responses:rate10m,job=webserver,code=500,instan
{var=task:http_responses:rate10m,job=webserver,code=200,instan
{var=task:http_responses:rate10m,job=webserver,code=500,instan
{var=task:http_responses:rate10m,job=webserver,code=200,instan
{var=task:http_responses:rate10m,job=webserver,code=500,instan
{var=task:http_responses:rate10m,job=webserver,code=200,instan
{var=task:http_responses:rate10m,job=webserver,code=500,instan


{var=dc:http_responses:rate10m,job=webserver}

{var=dc:http_responses:rate10m,job=webserver,code=200, ...} 3.
{var=dc:http_responses:rate10m,job=webserver,code=500, ...} 0.

{var=dc:http_responses:rate10m,job=webserver,code=!/200/}

{var=dc:http_responses:rate10m,job=webserver,code=500, ...} 0.

{var=dc:http_errors:rate10m,job=webserver}

{var=dc:http_errors:rate10m,job=webserver, ...} 0.6

{var=dc:http_errors:ratio_rate10m,job=webserver}

{var=dc:http_errors:ratio_rate10m,job=webserver} 0.15

Note


The preceding output shows the intermediate query in the dc:http_errors:rate10m rule that filters the non-200 error codes. Though the value of the expressions are the same, observe that the code label is retained in

one but removed from the other.

As mentioned previously, Borgmon rules create new time-series, so the results of the computations are kept in the time-series arena and can be inspected just as the source time-series are. The ability to do so allows for ad hoc querying, evaluation, and exploration as tables or charts. This is a useful feature for debugging while on-call, and if these ad hoc queries prove useful, they can be made permanent visualizations on a service console.

Alerting
When an alerting rule is evaluated by a Borgmon, the result is either true, in which case the alert is triggered, or false. Experience shows that alerts can "flap" (toggle their state quickly); therefore, the rules allow a minimum duration for which the alerting rule must be true before the alert is sent. Typically, this duration is set to at least two rule evaluation cycles to ensure no missed collections cause a false alert.
The following example creates an alert when the error ratio over 10 minutes exceeds 1% and the total number of errors exceeds 1 per second

rules <<<
{var=dc:http_errors:ratio_rate10m,job=webserver} > 0.01 and by job, error
{var=dc:http_errors:rate10m,job=webserver} > 1 for 2m
=> ErrorRatioTooHigh
details "webserver error ratio at %trigger_value%" labels { severity=page };
>>>


Our example holds the ratio rate at 0.15, which is well over the threshold of 0.01 in the alerting rule. However, the number of errors is not greater than 1 at this moment, so the alert won't be active. Once the number of errors exceeds 1, the alert will go pending for two minutes to ensure it isn't a transient state, and only then will it fire.
The alert rule contains a small template for filling out a message containing contextual information: which job the alert is for, the name of the alert, the numerical value of the triggering rule, and so on. The contextual information is

filled out by Borgmon when the alert fires and is sent in the Alert RPC.

Borgmon is connected to a centrally run service, known as the Alertmanager, which receives Alert RPCs when the rule first triggers, and then again when the alert is considered to be "firing." The Alertmanager is responsible for routing the alert notification to the correct destination. Alertmanager can be configured to do the following:
Inhibit certain alerts when others are active
Deduplicate alerts from multiple Borgmon that have the same labelsets
Fan-in or fan-out alerts based on their labelsets when multiple alerts with similar labelsets fire
As described in Monitoring Distributed Systems, teams send their page-worthy alerts to their on-call rotation and their important but subcritical alerts to their ticket queues. All other alerts should be retained as informational data for status dashboards.
A more comprehensive guide to alert design can be found in Service Level Objectives.

Sharding the Monitoring Topology
A Borgmon can import time-series data from other Borgmon, as well. While one could attempt to collect from all tasks in a service globally, doing so quickly becomes a scaling bottleneck and introduces a single point of failure into the design. Instead, a streaming protocol is used to transmit time-series data between Borgmon, saving CPU time and network bytes compared to the text-based varz format. A typical such deployment uses two or more global Borgmon for top- level aggregation and one Borgmon in each datacenter to monitor all the jobs running at that location. (Google divides the production network into zones for production changes, so having two or more global replicas provides diversity in the face of maintenance and outages for this otherwise single point of failure.)
As shown in Figure 10-3, more complicated deployments shard the datacenter Borgmon further into a purely scraping-only layer (often due to RAM and CPU constraints in a single Borgmon for very large services) and a DC aggregation layer that performs mostly rule evaluation for aggregation. Sometimes the global layer is split between rule evaluation and dashboarding. Upper-tier Borgmon can

filter the data they want to stream from the lower-tier Borgmon, so that the global Borgmon does not fill its arena with all the per-task time-series from the lower tiers. Thus, the aggregation hierarchy builds local caches of relevant time- series that can be drilled down into when required.


Figure 10-3. A data flow model of a hierarchy of Borgmon in three clusters

Black-Box Monitoring
Borgmon is a white-box monitoring system-it inspects the internal state of the target service, and the rules are written with knowledge of the internals in mind. The transparent nature of this model provides great power to identify quickly what components are failing, which queues are full, and where bottlenecks occur, both when responding to an incident and when testing a new feature deployment.
However, white-box monitoring does not provide a full picture of the system being monitored; relying solely upon white-box monitoring means that you aren't aware of what the users see. You only see the queries that arrive at the target; the queries that never make it due to a DNS error are invisible, while queries lost due to a server crash never make a sound. You can only alert on the

failures that you expected.

Teams at Google solve this coverage issue with Prober, which runs a protocol check against a target and reports success or failure. The prober can send alerts directly to Alertmanager, or its own varz can be collected by a Borgmon. Prober can validate the response payload of the protocol (e.g., the HTML contents of an HTTP response) and validate that the contents are expected, and even extract and export values as time-series. Teams often use Prober to export histograms of response times by operation type and payload size so that they can slice and dice the user-visible performance. Prober is a hybrid of the check-and-test model with some richer variable extraction to create time-series.
Prober can be pointed at either the frontend domain or behind the load balancer. By using both targets, we can detect localized failures and suppress alerts. For example, we might monitor both the load balanced www.google.com and the web servers in each datacenter behind the load balancer. This setup allows us to either know that traffic is still served when a datacenter fails, or to quickly isolate an edge in the traffic flow graph where a failure has occurred.

Maintaining the Configuration
Borgmon configuration separates the definition of the rules from the targets being monitored. This means the same sets of rules can be applied to many targets at once, instead of writing nearly identical configuration over and over. This separation of concerns might seem incidental, but it greatly reduces the cost of maintaining the monitoring by avoiding lots of repetition in describing the target systems.
Borgmon also supports language templates. This macro-like system enables engineers to construct libraries of rules that can be reused. This functionality again reduces repetition, thus reducing the likelihood of bugs in the configuration.
Of course, any high-level programming environment creates the opportunity for complexity, so Borgmon provides a way to build extensive unit and regression tests by synthesizing time-series data, in order to ensure that the rules behave as the author thinks they do. The Production Monitoring team runs a continuous integration service that executes a suite of these tests, packages the configuration, and ships the configuration to all the Borgmon in production,

which then validate the configuration before accepting it.

In the vast library of common templates that have been created, two classes of monitoring configuration have emerged. The first class simply codifies the emergent schema of variables exported from a given library of code, such that any user of the library can reuse the template of its varz. Such templates exist for the HTTP server library, memory allocation, the storage client library, and generic RPC services, among others. (While the varz interface declares no schema, the rule library associated with the code library ends up declaring a schema.)
The second class of library emerged as we built templates to manage the aggregation of data from a single-server task to the global service footprint. These libraries contain generic aggregation rules for exported variables that engineers can use to model the topology of their service.
For example, a service may provide a single global API, but be homed in many datacenters. Within each datacenter, the service is composed of several shards, and each shard is composed of several jobs with various numbers of tasks. An engineer can model this breakdown with Borgmon rules so that when debugging, subcomponents can be isolated from the rest of the system. These groupings typically follow the shared fate of components; e.g., individual tasks share fate due to configuration files, jobs in a shard share fate because they're homed in the same datacenter, and physical sites share fate due to networking.
Labeling conventions make such division possible: a Borgmon adds labels indicating the target's instance name and the shard and datacenter it occupies, which can be used to group and aggregate those time-series together.
Thus, we have multiple uses for labels on a time-series, though all are interchangeable:
Labels that define breakdowns of the data itself (e.g., our HTTP response code on the http_responses variable
Labels that define the source of the data (e.g., the instance or job name) Labels that indicate the locality or aggregation of the data within the service as a whole (e.g., the zone label describing a physical location, a shard label describing a logical grouping of tasks)
The templated nature of these libraries allows flexibility in their use. The same

template can be used to aggregate from each tier.

Ten Years On...
Borgmon transposed the model of check-and-alert per target into mass variable collection and a centralized rule evaluation across the time-series for alerting and diagnostics.
This decoupling allows the size of the system being monitored to scale independently of the size of alerting rules. These rules cost less to maintain because they're abstracted over a common time-series format. New applications come ready with metric exports in all components and libraries to which they link, and well-traveled aggregation and console templates, which further reduces the burden of implementation.
Ensuring that the cost of maintenance scales sublinearly with the size of the service is key to making monitoring (and all sustaining operations work) maintainable. This theme recurs in all SRE work, as SREs work to scale all aspects of their work to the global scale.
Ten years is a long time, though, and of course today the shape of the monitoring landscape within Google has evolved with experiments and changes, striving for continual improvement as the company grows.
Even though Borgmon remains internal to Google, the idea of treating time- series data as a data source for generating alerts is now accessible to everyone through those open source tools like Prometheus, Riemann, Heka, and Bosun, and probably others by the time you read this.

42Prometheus is an open source monitoring and time-series database system available at http://prometheus.io.

43Google was born in the USA, so we pronounce this "var-zee."
44The plural of Borgmon is Borgmon, like sheep.
45Many non-SRE teams use a generator to stamp out the initial boilerplate and ongoing updates, and find the generator much easier to use (though less powerful) than directly editing the rules.

46Many other applications use their service protocol to export their internal state, as well. OpenLDAP exports it through the cn=Monitor subtree; MySQL can report state with a SHOW VARIABLES query; Apache has its mod_status handler.

47https://golang.org/pkg/expvar/
48The Borg Name System (BNS) is described in The Production Environment at Google, from the Viewpoint of an SRE.

49Recall in Monitoring Distributed Systems the distinction between alerting on symptoms and on causes.

50This 12-hour horizon is a magic number that aims to have enough information for debugging an incident in RAM for fast queries without costing too much RAM.

51The service and zone labels are elided here for space, but are present in the returned expression.

52Computing the sum of rates instead of the rate of sums defends the result against counter resets or missing data, perhaps due to a task restart or failed collection of data.

53Despite being untyped, the majority of varz are simple counters. Borgmon's rate function handles all the corner cases of counter resets.

54The service and zone labels are elided for space.
55The service and zone labels are elided for space.

Chapter 11 - Being On-Call
Written by Andrea Spadaccini56 Edited by Kavita Guliani
Being on-call is a critical duty that many operations and engineering teams must undertake in order to keep their services reliable and available. However, there are several pitfalls in the organization of on-call rotations and responsibilities that can lead to serious consequences for the services and for the teams if not avoided. This chapter describes the primary tenets of the approach to on-call that Google's Site Reliability Engineers (SREs) have developed over years, and explains how that approach has led to reliable services and sustainable workload over time.

Introduction
Several professions require employees to perform some sort of on-call duty, which entails being available for calls during both working and nonworking hours. In the IT context, on-call activities have historically been performed by dedicated Ops teams tasked with the primary responsibility of keeping the service(s) for which they are responsible in good health.
Many important services in Google, e.g., Search, Ads, and Gmail, have dedicated teams of SREs responsible for the performance and reliability of these services. Thus, SREs are on-call for the services they support. The SRE teams are quite different from purely operational teams in that they place heavy emphasis on the use of engineering to approach problems. These problems, which typically fall in the operational domain, exist at a scale that would be intractable without software engineering solutions.
To enforce this type of problem solving, Google hires people with a diverse background in systems and software engineering into SRE teams. We cap the amount of time SREs spend on purely operational work at 50%; at minimum, 50% of an SRE's time should be allocated to engineering projects that further scale the impact of the team through automation, in addition to improving the service.

Life of an On-Call Engineer
This section describes the typical activities of an on-call engineer and provides some background for the rest of the chapter.
As the guardians of production systems, on-call engineers take care of their assigned operations by managing outages that affect the team and performing and/or vetting production changes.
When on-call, an engineer is available to perform operations on production systems within minutes, according to the paging response times agreed to by the team and the business system owners. Typical values are 5 minutes for user- facing or otherwise highly time-critical services, and 30 minutes for less time- sensitive systems. The company provides the page-receiving device, which is typically a phone. Google has flexible alert delivery systems that can dispatch pages via multiple mechanisms (email, SMS, robot call, app) across multiple devices.
Response times are related to desired service availability, as demonstrated by the following simplistic example: if a user-facing system must obtain 4 nines of availability in a given quarter (99.99%), the allowed quarterly downtime is around 13 minutes (Availability Table). This constraint implies that the reaction time of on-call engineers has to be in the order of minutes (strictly speaking, 13 minutes). For systems with more relaxed SLOs, the reaction time can be on the order of tens of minutes.
As soon as a page is received and acknowledged, the on-call engineer is expected to triage the problem and work toward its resolution, possibly involving other team members and escalating as needed.
Nonpaging production events, such as lower priority alerts or software releases, can also be handled and/or vetted by the on-call engineer during business hours. These activities are less urgent than paging events, which take priority over almost every other task, including project work. For more insight on interrupts and other non-paging events that contribute to operational load, see Dealing with Interrupts.
Many teams have both a primary and a secondary on-call rotation. The distribution of duties between the primary and the secondary varies from team to

team. One team might employ the secondary as a fall-through for the pages the primary on-call misses. Another team might specify that the primary on-call handles only pages, while the secondary handles all other non-urgent production activities.
In teams for which a secondary rotation is not strictly required for duty distribution, it is common for two related teams to serve as secondary on-call for each other, with fall-through handling duties. This setup eliminates the need for an exclusive secondary on-call rotation.
There are many ways to organize on-call rotations; for detailed analysis, refer to the "Oncall" chapter of [Lim14].

Balanced On-Call
SRE teams have specific constraints on the quantity and quality of on-call shifts. The quantity of on-call can be calculated by the percent of time spent by engineers on on-call duties. The quality of on-call can be calculated by the number of incidents that occur during an on-call shift.
SRE managers have the responsibility of keeping the on-call workload balanced and sustainable across these two axes.

Balance in Quantity

We strongly believe that the "E" in "SRE" is a defining characteristic of our organization, so we strive to invest at least 50% of SRE time into engineering: of the remainder, no more than 25% can be spent on-call, leaving up to another 25% on other types of operational, nonproject work.
Using the 25% on-call rule, we can derive the minimum number of SREs required to sustain a 24/7 on-call rotation. Assuming that there are always two people on-call (primary and secondary, with different duties), the minimum number of engineers needed for on-call duty from a single-site team is eight: assuming week-long shifts, each engineer is on-call (primary or secondary) for one week every month. For dual-site teams, a reasonable minimum size of each team is six, both to honor the 25% rule and to ensure a substantial and critical mass of engineers for the team.

If a service entails enough work to justify growing a single-site team, we prefer to create a multi-site team. A multi-site team is advantageous for two reasons:
Night shifts have detrimental effects on people's health [Dur05], and a multi-site "follow the sun" rotation allows teams to avoid night shifts altogether.
Limiting the number of engineers in the on-call rotation ensures that engineers do not lose touch with the production systems (see A Treacherous Enemy: Operational Underload).
However, multi-site teams incur communication and coordination overhead. Therefore, the decision to go multi-site or single-site should be based upon the trade-offs each option entails, the importance of the system, and the workload each system generates.

Balance in Quality

For each on-call shift, an engineer should have sufficient time to deal with any incidents and follow-up activities such as writing postmortems [Loo10]. Let's define an incident as a sequence of events and alerts that are related to the same root cause and would be discussed as part of the same postmortem. We've found that on average, dealing with the tasks involved in an on-call incident-root- cause analysis, remediation, and follow-up activities like writing a postmortem and fixing bugs-takes 6 hours. It follows that the maximum number of incidents per day is 2 per 12-hour on-call shift. In order to stay within this upper bound, the distribution of paging events should be very flat over time, with a likely median value of 0: if a given component or issue causes pages every day (median incidents/day > 1), it is likely that something else will break at some point, thus causing more incidents than should be permitted.
If this limit is temporarily exceeded, e.g., for a quarter, corrective measures should be put in place to make sure that the operational load returns to a sustainable state (see Operational Overload and Embedding an SRE to Recover from Operational Overload).

Compensation

Adequate compensation needs to be considered for out-of-hours support. Different organizations handle on-call compensation in different ways; Google

offers time-off-in-lieu or straight cash compensation, capped at some proportion of overall salary. The compensation cap represents, in practice, a limit on the amount of on-call work that will be taken on by any individual. This compensation structure ensures incentivization to be involved in on-call duties as required by the team, but also promotes a balanced on-call work distribution and limits potential drawbacks of excessive on-call work, such as burnout or inadequate time for project work.

Feeling Safe
As mentioned earlier, SRE teams support Google's most critical systems. Being an SRE on-call typically means assuming responsibility for user-facing, revenue- critical systems or for the infrastructure required to keep these systems up and running. SRE methodology for thinking about and tackling problems is vital for the appropriate operation of services.
Modern research identifies two distinct ways of thinking that an individual may, consciously or subconsciously, choose when faced with challenges [Kah11]:
Intuitive, automatic, and rapid action
Rational, focused, and deliberate cognitive functions

When one is dealing with the outages related to complex systems, the second of these options is more likely to produce better results and lead to well-planned incident handling.
To make sure that the engineers are in the appropriate frame of mind to leverage the latter mindset, it's important to reduce the stress related to being on-call. The importance and the impact of the services and the consequences of potential outages can create significant pressure on the on-call engineers, damaging the well-being of individual team members and possibly prompting SREs to make incorrect choices that can endanger the availability of the service. Stress hormones like cortisol and corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) are known to cause behavioral consequences-including fear-that can impair cognitive functions and cause suboptimal decision making [Chr09].
Under the influence of these stress hormones, the more deliberate cognitive approach is typically subsumed by unreflective and unconsidered (but immediate) action, leading to potential abuse of heuristics. Heuristics are very

tempting behaviors when one is on-call. For example, when the same alert pages for the fourth time in the week, and the previous three pages were initiated by an external infrastructure system, it is extremely tempting to exercise confirmation bias by automatically associating this fourth occurrence of the problem with the previous cause.
While intuition and quick reactions can seem like desirable traits in the middle of incident management, they have downsides. Intuition can be wrong and is often less supportable by obvious data. Thus, following intuition can lead an engineer to waste time pursuing a line of reasoning that is incorrect from the start. Quick reactions are deep-rooted in habit, and habitual responses are unconsidered, which means they can be disastrous. The ideal methodology in incident management strikes the perfect balance of taking steps at the desired pace when enough data is available to make a reasonable decision while simultaneously critically examining your assumptions.
It's important that on-call SREs understand that they can rely on several resources that make the experience of being on-call less daunting than it may seem. The most important on-call resources are:
Clear escalation paths
Well-defined incident-management procedures
A blameless postmortem culture ([Loo10], [All12])

The developer teams of SRE-supported systems usually participate in a 24/7 on- call rotation, and it is always possible to escalate to these partner teams when necessary. The appropriate escalation of outages is generally a principled way to react to serious outages with significant unknown dimensions.
When one is handling incidents, if the issue is complex enough to involve multiple teams or if, after some investigation, it is not yet possible to estimate an upper bound for the incident's time span, it can be useful to adopt a formal incident-management protocol. Google SRE uses the protocol described in Managing Incidents, which offers an easy-to-follow and well-defined set of steps that aid an on-call engineer to rationally pursue a satisfactory incident resolution with all the required help. This protocol is internally supported by a web-based tool that automates most of the incident management actions, such as handing off roles and recording and communicating status updates. This tool allows incident managers to focus on dealing with the incident, rather than spending

time and cognitive effort on mundane actions such as formatting emails or updating several communication channels at once.
Finally, when an incident occurs, it's important to evaluate what went wrong, recognize what went well, and take action to prevent the same errors from recurring in the future. SRE teams must write postmortems after significant incidents and detail a full timeline of the events that occurred. By focusing on events rather than the people, these postmortems provide significant value. Rather than placing blame on individuals, they derive value from the systematic analysis of production incidents. Mistakes happen, and software should make sure that we make as few mistakes as possible. Recognizing automation opportunities is one of the best ways to prevent human errors [Loo10].

Avoiding Inappropriate Operational Load
As mentioned in Balanced On-Call, SREs spend at most 50% of their time on operational work. What happens if operational activities exceed this limit?

Operational Overload

The SRE team and leadership are responsible for including concrete objectives in quarterly work planning in order to make sure that the workload returns to sustainable levels. Temporarily loaning an experienced SRE to an overloaded team, discussed in Embedding an SRE to Recover from Operational Overload, can provide enough breathing room so that the team can make headway in addressing issues.
Ideally, symptoms of operational overload should be measurable, so that the goals can be quantified (e.g., number of daily tickets < 5, paging events per shift
< 2).

Misconfigured monitoring is a common cause of operational overload. Paging alerts should be aligned with the symptoms that threaten a service's SLOs. All paging alerts should also be actionable. Low-priority alerts that bother the on- call engineer every hour (or more frequently) disrupt productivity, and the fatigue such alerts induce can also cause serious alerts to be treated with less attention than necessary.See Dealing with Interrupts for further discussion.
It is also important to control the number of alerts that the on-call engineers

receive for a single incident. Sometimes a single abnormal condition can generate several alerts, so it's important to regulate the alert fan-out by ensuring that related alerts are grouped together by the monitoring or alerting system. If, for any reason, duplicate or uninformative alerts are generated during an incident, silencing those alerts can provide the necessary quiet for the on-call engineer to focus on the incident itself. Noisy alerts that systematically generate more than one alert per incident should be tweaked to approach a 1:1 alert/incident ratio. Doing so allows the on-call engineer to focus on the incident instead of triaging duplicate alerts.
Sometimes the changes that cause operational overload are not under the control of the SRE teams. For example, the application developers might introduce changes that cause the system to be more noisy, less reliable, or both. In this case, it is appropriate to work together with the application developers to set common goals to improve the system.
In extreme cases, SRE teams may have the option to "give back the pager"- SRE can ask the developer team to be exclusively on-call for the system until it meets the standards of the SRE team in question. Giving back the pager doesn't happen very frequently, because it's almost always possible to work with the developer team to reduce the operational load and make a given system more reliable. In some cases, though, complex or architectural changes spanning multiple quarters might be required to make a system sustainable from an operational point of view. In such cases, the SRE team should not be subject to an excessive operational load. Instead, it is appropriate to negotiate the reorganization of on-call responsibilities with the development team, possibly routing some or all paging alerts to the developer on-call. Such a solution is typically a temporary measure, during which time the SRE and developer teams work together to get the service in shape to be on-boarded by the SRE team again.
The possibility of renegotiating on-call responsibilities between SRE and product development teams attests to the balance of powers between the teams.57 This working relationship also exemplifies how the healthy tension between these two teams and the values that they represent-reliability versus feature
velocity-is typically resolved by greatly benefiting the service and, by extension, the company as a whole.

A Treacherous Enemy: Operational Underload

Being on-call for a quiet system is blissful, but what happens if the system is too quiet or when SREs are not on-call often enough? An operational underload is undesirable for an SRE team. Being out of touch with production for long periods of time can lead to confidence issues, both in terms of overconfidence and underconfidence, while knowledge gaps are discovered only when an incident occurs.
To counteract this eventuality, SRE teams should be sized to allow every engineer to be on-call at least once or twice a quarter, thus ensuring that each team member is sufficiently exposed to production. "Wheel of Misfortune" exercises (discussed in Accelerating SREs to On-Call and Beyond) are also useful team activities that can help to hone and improve troubleshooting skills and knowledge of the service. Google also has a company-wide annual disaster recovery event called DiRT (Disaster Recovery Training) that combines theoretical and practical drills to perform multiday testing of infrastructure systems and individual services; see [Kri12].

Conclusions
The approach to on-call described in this chapter serves as a guideline for all SRE teams in Google and is key to fostering a sustainable and manageable work environment. Google's approach to on-call has enabled us to use engineering work as the primary means to scale production responsibilities and maintain high reliability and availability despite the increasing complexity and number of systems and services for which SREs are responsible.
While this approach might not be immediately applicable to all contexts in which engineers need to be on-call for IT services, we believe it represents a solid model that organizations can adopt in scaling to meet a growing volume of on-call work.

56An earlier version of this chapter appeared as an article in ;login: (October 2015, vol. 40, no. 5).

57For more discussion on the natural tension between SRE and product development teams, see Introduction.

Chapter 12 - Effective Troubleshooting
Written by Chris Jones

Be warned that being an expert is more than understanding how a system is supposed to work. Expertise is gained by investigating why a system doesn't work.
Brian Redman

Ways in which things go right are special cases of the ways in which things go wrong.
John Allspaw

Troubleshooting is a critical skill for anyone who operates distributed computing systems-especially SREs-but it's often viewed as an innate skill that some people have and others don't. One reason for this assumption is that, for those who troubleshoot often, it's an ingrained process; explaining how to troubleshoot is difficult, much like explaining how to ride a bike. However, we believe that troubleshooting is both learnable and teachable.
Novices are often tripped up when troubleshooting because the exercise ideally depends upon two factors: an understanding of how to troubleshoot generically (i.e., without any particular system knowledge) and a solid knowledge of the system. While you can investigate a problem using only the generic process and
derivation from first principles,58 we usually find this approach to be less efficient and less effective than understanding how things are supposed to work. Knowledge of the system typically limits the effectiveness of an SRE new to a system; there's little substitute to learning how the system is designed and built.
Let's look at a general model of the troubleshooting process. Readers with expertise in troubleshooting may quibble with our definitions and process; if your method is effective for you, there's no reason not to stick with it.

Theory
Formally, we can think of the troubleshooting process as an application of the hypothetico-deductive method:59 given a set of observations about a system and a theoretical basis for understanding system behavior, we iteratively hypothesize potential causes for the failure and try to test those hypotheses.
In an idealized model such as that in Figure 12-1, we'd start with a problem report telling us that something is wrong with the system. Then we can look at the system's telemetry60 and logs to understand its current state. This information, combined with our knowledge of how the system is built, how it
should operate, and its failure modes, enables us to identify some possible causes.

Figure 12-1. A process for troubleshooting

We can then test our hypotheses in one of two ways. We can compare the observed state of the system against our theories to find confirming or disconfirming evidence. Or, in some cases, we can actively "treat" the system- that is, change the system in a controlled way-and observe the results. This second approach refines our understanding of the system's state and possible cause(s) of the reported problems. Using either of these strategies, we repeatedly test until a root cause is identified, at which point we can then take corrective action to prevent a recurrence and write a postmortem. Of course, fixing the proximate cause(s) needn't always wait for root-causing or postmortem writing.

Common Pitfalls


Ineffective troubleshooting sessions are plagued by problems at the Triage, Examine, and Diagnose steps, often because of a lack of deep system understanding. The following are common pitfalls to avoid:
Looking at symptoms that aren't relevant or misunderstanding the meaning of system metrics. Wild goose chases often result.
Misunderstanding how to change the system, its inputs, or its environment, so as to safely and effectively test hypotheses.
Coming up with wildly improbable theories about what's wrong, or latching on to causes of past problems, reasoning that since it happened once, it must be happening again.
Hunting down spurious correlations that are actually coincidences or are correlated with shared causes.
Fixing the first and second common pitfalls is a matter of learning the system in question and becoming experienced with the common patterns used in distributed systems. The third trap is a set of logical fallacies that can be avoided by remembering that not all failures are equally probable-as doctors are taught,
"when you hear hoofbeats, think of horses not zebras."61 Also remember that, all things being equal, we should prefer simpler explanations.62
Finally, we should remember that correlation is not causation:63 some correlated events, say packet loss within a cluster and failed hard drives in the cluster, share common causes-in this case, a power outage, though network failure clearly doesn't cause the hard drive failures nor vice versa. Even worse, as systems grow in size and complexity and as more metrics are monitored, it's inevitable that there will be events that happen to correlate well with other events, purely

by coincidence.64
Understanding failures in our reasoning process is the first step to avoiding them and becoming more effective in solving problems. A methodical approach to knowing what we do know, what we don't know, and what we need to know, makes it simpler and more straightforward to figure out what's gone wrong and how to fix it.

In Practice
In practice, of course, troubleshooting is never as clean as our idealized model suggests it should be. There are some steps that can make the process less painful and more productive for both those experiencing system problems and those responding to them.

Problem Report

Every problem starts with a problem report, which might be an automated alert or one of your colleagues saying, "The system is slow." An effective report should tell you the expected behavior, the actual behavior, and, if possible, how to reproduce the behavior.65 Ideally, the reports should have a consistent form
and be stored in a searchable location, such as a bug tracking system. Here, our teams often have customized forms or small web apps that ask for information that's relevant to diagnosing the particular systems they support, which then automatically generate and route a bug. This may also be a good point at which to provide tools for problem reporters to try self-diagnosing or self-repairing common issues on their own.
It's common practice at Google to open a bug for every issue, even those received via email or instant messaging. Doing so creates a log of investigation and remediation activities that can be referenced in the future. Many teams discourage reporting problems directly to a person for several reasons: this practice introduces an additional step of transcribing the report into a bug, produces lower-quality reports that aren't visible to other members of the team, and tends to concentrate the problem-solving load on a handful of team members that the reporters happen to know, rather than the person currently on duty (see also Dealing with Interrupts).

Shakespeare Has a Problem

You're on-call for the Shakespeare search service and receive an alert, Shakespeare-BlackboxProbe_SearchFailure: your black-box monitoring hasn't been able to find search results for "the forms of things unknown" for the past five minutes. The alerting system has filed a bug-with links to the black- box prober's recent results and to the playbook entry for this alert-and assigned it to you. Time to spring into action!

Triage

Once you receive a problem report, the next step is to figure out what to do about it. Problems can vary in severity: an issue might affect only one user under very specific circumstances (and might have a workaround), or it might entail a complete global outage for a service. Your response should be appropriate for the problem's impact: it's appropriate to declare an all-hands-on-deck emergency for the latter (see Managing Incidents), but doing so for the former is overkill. Assessing an issue's severity requires an exercise of good engineering judgment and, often, a degree of calm under pressure.
Your first response in a major outage may be to start troubleshooting and try to find a root cause as quickly as possible. Ignore that instinct!
Instead, your course of action should be to make the system work as well as it can under the circumstances. This may entail emergency options, such as diverting traffic from a broken cluster to others that are still working, dropping traffic wholesale to prevent a cascading failure, or disabling subsystems to lighten the load. Stopping the bleeding should be your first priority; you aren't helping your users if the system dies while you're root-causing. Of course, an emphasis on rapid triage doesn't preclude taking steps to preserve evidence of what's going wrong, such as logs, to help with subsequent root-cause analysis.
Novice pilots are taught that their first responsibility in an emergency is to fly the airplane [Gaw09]; troubleshooting is secondary to getting the plane and everyone on it safely onto the ground. This approach is also applicable to computer systems: for example, if a bug is leading to possibly unrecoverable data corruption, freezing the system to prevent further failure may be better than letting this behavior continue.
This realization is often quite unsettling and counterintuitive for new SREs,

particularly those whose prior experience was in product development organizations.

Examine

We need to be able to examine what each component in the system is doing in order to understand whether or not it's behaving correctly.
Ideally, a monitoring system is recording metrics for your system as discussed in Practical Alerting from Time-Series Data. These metrics are a good place to start figuring out what's wrong. Graphing time-series and operations on time-series can be an effective way to understand the behavior of specific pieces of a system
and find correlations that might suggest where problems began.66
Logging is another invaluable tool. Exporting information about each operation and about system state makes it possible to understand exactly what a process was doing at a given point in time. You may need to analyze system logs across one or many processes. Tracing requests through the whole stack using tools such as Dapper [Sig10] provides a very powerful way to understand how a distributed system is working, though varying use cases imply significantly different tracing designs [Sam14].

Logging


Text logs are very helpful for reactive debugging in real time, while storing logs in a structured binary format can make it possible to build tools to conduct retrospective analysis with much more information.
It's really useful to have multiple verbosity levels available, along with a way to increase these levels on the fly. This functionality enables you to examine any or all operations in incredible detail without having to restart your process, while still allowing you to dial back the verbosity levels when your service is operating normally. Depending of the volume of traffic your service receives, it might be better to use statistical sampling; for example, you might show one out of every 1,000 operations.
A next step is to include a selection language so that you can say "show me operations that match X," for a wide range of X-e.g., Set RPCs with a payload size below 1,024 bytes, or operations that took longer than 10 ms to return, or

which called doSomethingInteresting() in rpc_handler.py. You might even want to design your logging infrastructure so that you can turn it on as needed, quickly and selectively.

Exposing current state is the third trick in our toolbox. For example, Google servers have endpoints that show a sample of RPCs recently sent or received, so it's possible to understand how any one server is communicating with others without referencing an architecture diagram. These endpoints also show histograms of error rates and latency for each type of RPC, so that it's possible to quickly tell what's unhealthy. Some systems have endpoints that show their current configuration or allow examination of their data; for instance, Google's Borgmon servers (Practical Alerting from Time-Series Data) can show the monitoring rules they're using, and even allow tracing a particular computation step-by-step to the source metrics from which a value is derived.
Finally, you may even need to instrument a client to experiment with, in order to discover what a component is returning in response to requests.

Debugging Shakespeare


Using the link to the black-box monitoring results in the bug, you discover that the prober sends an HTTP GET request to the /api/search endpoint:

{
'search_text': 'the forms of things unknown'
}

It expects to receive a response with an HTTP 200 response code and a JSON payload exactly matching:

[{
"work": "A Midsummer Night's Dream", "act": 5,
"scene": 1,
"line": 2526, "speaker": "Theseus"
}]

The system is set up to send a probe once a minute; over the past 10 minutes, about half the probes have succeeded, though with no discernible pattern. Unfortunately, the prober doesn't show you what was returned when it failed;

you make a note to fix that for the future.

Using curl, you manually send requests to the search endpoint and get a failed response with HTTP response code 502 (Bad Gateway) and no payload. It has an HTTP header, X-Request-Trace, which lists the addresses of the backend servers responsible for responding to that request. With this information, you can now examine those backends to test whether they're responding appropriately.

Diagnose

A thorough understanding of the system's design is decidedly helpful for coming up with plausible hypotheses about what's gone wrong, but there are also some generic practices that will help even without domain knowledge.

Simplify and reduce

Ideally, components in a system have well-defined interfaces and perform known transformations from their input to their output (in our example, given an input search text, a component might return output containing possible matches). It's then possible to look at the connections between components-or, equivalently, at the data flowing between them-to determine whether a given component is working properly. Injecting known test data in order to check that the resulting output is expected (a form of black-box testing) at each step can be especially effective, as can injecting data intended to probe possible causes of errors. Having a solid reproducible test case makes debugging much faster, and it may be possible to use the case in a non-production environment where more invasive or riskier techniques are available than would be possible in production.
Dividing and conquering is a very useful general-purpose solution technique. In a multilayer system where work happens throughout a stack of components, it's often best to start systematically from one end of the stack and work toward the other end, examining each component in turn. This strategy is also well-suited for use with data processing pipelines. In exceptionally large systems, proceeding linearly may be too slow; an alternative, bisection, splits the system in half and examines the communication paths between components on one side and the other. After determining whether one half seems to be working properly, repeat the process until you're left with a possibly faulty component.

Ask "what," "where," and "why"

A malfunctioning system is often still trying to do something-just not the thing you want it to be doing. Finding out what it's doing, then asking why it's doing that and where its resources are being used or where its output is going can help you understand how things have gone wrong.67

Unpacking the Causes of a Symptom


Symptom: A Spanner cluster has high latency and RPCs to its servers are timing out.
Why? The Spanner server tasks are using all their CPU time and can't make progress on all the requests the clients send.
Where in the server is the CPU time being used? Profiling the server shows it's sorting entries in logs checkpointed to disk.
Where in the log-sorting code is it being used? When evaluating a regular expression against paths to log files.
Solutions: Rewrite the regular expression to avoid backtracking. Look in the codebase for similar patterns. Consider using RE2, which does not backtrack and guarantees linear runtime growth with input size.68

What touched it last

Systems have inertia: we've found that a working computer system tends to remain in motion until acted upon by an external force, such as a configuration change or a shift in the type of load served. Recent changes to a system can be a productive place to start identifying what's going wrong.69
Well-designed systems should have extensive production logging to track new version deployments and configuration changes at all layers of the stack, from the server binaries handling user traffic down to the packages installed on individual nodes in the cluster. Correlating changes in a system's performance and behavior with other events in the system and environment can also be helpful in constructing monitoring dashboards; for example, you might annotate a graph showing the system's error rates with the start and end times of a

deployment of a new version, as seen in Figure 12-2.

Figure 12-2. Error rates graphed against deployment start and end times

Manually sending a request to the /api/search endpoint (see Debugging Shakespeare) and seeing the failure listing backend servers that handled the response lets you discount the likelihood that the problem is with the API frontend server and with the load balancers: the response probably wouldn't have included that information if the request hadn't at least made it to the search backends and failed there. Now you can focus your efforts on the backends- analyzing their logs, sending test queries to see what responses they return, and examining their exported metrics.

Specific diagnoses

While the generic tools described previously are helpful across a broad range of problem domains, you will likely find it helpful to build tools and systems to help with diagnosing your particular services. Google SREs spend much of their time building such tools. While many of these tools are necessarily specific to a given system, be sure to look for commonalities between services and teams to

avoid duplicating effort.

Test and Treat

Once you've come up with a short list of possible causes, it's time to try to find which factor is at the root of the actual problem. Using the experimental method, we can try to rule in or rule out our hypotheses. For instance, suppose we think a problem is caused by either a network failure between an application logic server and a database server, or by the database refusing connections. Trying to connect to the database with the same credentials the application logic server uses can refute the second hypothesis, while pinging the database server may be able to refute the first, depending on network topology, firewall rules, and other factors. Following the code and trying to imitate the code flow, step-by-step, may point to exactly what's going wrong.
There are a number of considerations to keep in mind when designing tests (which may be as simple as sending a ping or as complicated as removing traffic from a cluster and injecting specially formed requests to find a race condition):
An ideal test should have mutually exclusive alternatives, so that it can rule one group of hypotheses in and rule another set out. In practice, this may be difficult to achieve.
Consider the obvious first: perform the tests in decreasing order of likelihood, considering possible risks to the system from the test. It probably makes more sense to test for network connectivity problems between two machines before looking into whether a recent configuration change removed a user's access to the second machine.
An experiment may provide misleading results due to confounding factors. For example, a firewall rule might permit access only from a specific IP address, which might make pinging the database from your workstation fail, even if pinging from the application logic server's machine would have succeeded.
Active tests may have side effects that change future test results. For instance, allowing a process to use more CPUs may make operations faster, but might increase the likelihood of encountering data races. Similarly, turning on verbose logging might make a latency problem even worse and

confuse your results: is the problem getting worse on its own, or because of the logging?
Some tests may not be definitive, only suggestive. It can be very difficult to make race conditions or deadlocks happen in a timely and reproducible manner, so you may have to settle for less certain evidence that these are the causes.
Take clear notes of what ideas you had, which tests you ran, and the results you saw.70 Particularly when you are dealing with more complicated and drawn-out cases, this documentation may be crucial in helping you remember exactly what happened and prevent having to repeat these steps.71 If you performed active testing by changing a system-for instance by giving more resources to a process-making changes in a systematic and documented fashion will help you return the system to its pre-test setup, rather than running in an unknown hodge- podge configuration.

Negative Results Are Magic
Written by Randall Bosetti Edited by Joan Wendt

A "negative" result is an experimental outcome in which the expected effect is absent-that is, any experiment that doesn't work out as planned. This includes new designs, heuristics, or human processes that fail to improve upon the systems they replace.
Negative results should not be ignored or discounted. Realizing you're wrong has much value: a clear negative result can resolve some of the hardest design questions. Often a team has two seemingly reasonable designs but progress in one direction has to address vague and speculative questions about whether the other direction might be better.
Experiments with negative results are conclusive. They tell us something certain about production, or the design space, or the performance limits of an existing system. They can help others determine whether their own experiments or designs are worthwhile. For example, a given development team might decide against using a particular web server because it can handle only ~800 connections out of the needed 8,000 connections before failing due to lock contention. When a subsequent development team decides to evaluate web

servers, instead of starting from scratch, they can use this already well- documented negative result as a starting point to decide quickly whether (a) they need fewer than 800 connections or (b) the lock contention problems have been resolved.
Even when negative results do not apply directly to someone else's experiment, the supplementary data gathered can help others choose new experiments or avoid pitfalls in previous designs. Microbenchmarks, documented antipatterns, and project postmortems all fit this category. You should consider the scope of the negative result when designing an experiment, because a broad or especially robust negative result will help your peers even more.
Tools and methods can outlive the experiment and inform future work. As an example, benchmarking tools and load generators can result just as easily from a disconfirming experiment as a supporting one. Many webmasters have benefited from the difficult, detail-oriented work that produced Apache Bench, a web server loadtest, even though its first results were likely disappointing.
Building tools for repeatable experiments can have indirect benefits as well: although one application you build may not benefit from having its database on SSDs or from creating indices for dense keys, the next one just might. Writing a script that allows you to easily try out these configuration changes ensures you don't forget or miss optimizations in your next project.
Publishing negative results improves our industry's data-driven culture. Accounting for negative results and statistical insignificance reduces the bias in our metrics and provides an example to others of how to maturely accept uncertainty. By publishing everything, you encourage others to do the same, and everyone in the industry collectively learns much more quickly. SRE has already learned this lesson with high-quality postmortems, which have had a large positive effect on production stability.
Publish your results. If you are interested in an experiment's results, there's a good chance that other people are as well. When you publish the results, those people do not have to design and run a similar experiment themselves. It's tempting and common to avoid reporting negative results because it's easy to perceive that the experiment "failed." Some experiments are doomed, and they tend to be caught by review. Many more experiments are simply unreported because people mistakenly believe that negative results are not progress.

Do your part by telling everyone about the designs, algorithms, and team workflows you've ruled out. Encourage your peers by recognizing that negative results are part of thoughtful risk taking and that every well-designed experiment has merit. Be skeptical of any design document, performance review, or essay that doesn't mention failure. Such a document is potentially either too heavily filtered, or the author was not rigorous in his or her methods.
Above all, publish the results you find surprising so that others-including your future self-aren't surprised.

Cure

Ideally, you've now narrowed the set of possible causes to one. Next, we'd like to prove that it's the actual cause. Definitively proving that a given factor caused a problem-by reproducing it at will-can be difficult to do in production systems; often, we can only find probable causal factors, for the following reasons:
Systems are complex. It's quite likely that there are multiple factors, each of which individually is not the cause, but which taken jointly are causes.72 Real systems are also often path-dependent, so that they must be in a specific state before a failure occurs.
Reproducing the problem in a live production system may not be an option, either because of the complexity of getting the system into a state where the failure can be triggered, or because further downtime may be unacceptable. Having a nonproduction environment can mitigate these challenges, though at the cost of having another copy of the system to run.
Once you've found the factors that caused the problem, it's time to write up notes on what went wrong with the system, how you tracked down the problem, how you fixed the problem, and how to prevent it from happening again. In other words, you need to write a postmortem (although ideally, the system is alive at this point!).

Case Study

App Engine,73 part of Google's Cloud Platform, is a platform-as-a-service

product that allows developers to build services atop Google's infrastructure. One of our internal customers filed a problem report indicating that they'd recently seen a dramatic increase in latency, CPU usage, and number of running processes needed to serve traffic for their app, a content-management system
used to build documentation for developers.74 The customer couldn't find any recent changes to their code that correlated with the increase in resources, and there hadn't been an increase in traffic to their app (see Figure 12-3), so they were wondering if a change in the App Engine service was responsible.
Our investigation discovered that latency had indeed increased by nearly an order of magnitude (as shown in Figure 12-4). Simultaneously, the amount of CPU time (Figure 12-5) and number of serving processes (Figure 12-6) had nearly quadrupled. Clearly something was wrong. It was time to start troubleshooting.

Figure 12-3. Application's requests received per second, showing a brief spike and	return	to	normal

Figure 12-4. Application's latency, showing 50th, 95th, and 99th percentiles (lines) with a heatmap showing how many requests fell into a given latency bucket	at	any	point	in	time	(shade)

Figure   12-5.   Aggregate   CPU   usage   for   the   application


Figure 12-6. Number of instances for the application

Typically a sudden increase in latency and resource usage indicates either an increase in traffic sent to the system or a change in system configuration. However, we could easily rule out both of these possible causes: while a spike in traffic to the app around 20:45 could explain a brief surge in resource usage, we'd expect traffic to return to baseline fairly soon after request volume normalized. This spike certainly shouldn't have continued for multiple days, beginning when the app's developers filed the report and we started looking into the problem. Second, the change in performance happened on Saturday, when neither changes to the app nor the production environment were in flight. The service's most recent code pushes and configuration pushes had completed days before. Furthermore, if the problem originated with the service, we'd expect to see similar effects on other apps using the same infrastructure. However, no other apps were experiencing similar effects.
We referred the problem report to our counterparts, App Engine's developers, to investigate whether the customer was encountering any idiosyncrasies in the serving infrastructure. The developers weren't able to find any oddities, either. However, a developer did notice a correlation between the latency increase and the increase of a specific data storage API call, merge_join, which often indicates suboptimal indexing when reading from the datastore. Adding a composite index on the properties the app uses to select objects from the datastore would speed those requests, and in principle, speed the application as a whole-but we'd need to figure out which properties needed indexing. A quick look at the application's code didn't reveal any obvious suspects.
It was time to pull out the heavy machinery in our toolkit: using Dapper [Sig10], we traced the steps individual HTTP requests took-from their receipt by a frontend reverse proxy through to the point where the app's code returned a response-and looked at the RPCs issued by each server involved in handling that request. Doing so would allow us to see which properties were included in requests to the datastore, then create the appropriate indices.

While investigating, we discovered that requests for static content such as images, which weren't served from the datastore, were also much slower than expected. Looking at graphs with file-level granularity, we saw their responses had been much faster only a few days before. This implied that the observed correlation between merge_join and the latency increase was spurious and that our suboptimal-indexing theory was fatally flawed.

Examining the unexpectedly slow requests for static content, most of the RPCs sent from the application were to a memcache service, so the requests should have been very fast-on the order of a few milliseconds. These requests did turn out to be very fast, so the problem didn't seem to originate there. However, between the time the app started working on a request and when it made the first RPCs, there was about a 250 ms period where the app was doing...well, something. Because App Engine runs code provided by users, its SRE team does not profile or inspect app code, so we couldn't tell what the app was doing in that interval; similarly, Dapper couldn't help track down what was going on since it can only trace RPC calls, and none were made during that period.
Faced with what was, by this point, quite a mystery, we decided not to solve it...yet. The customer had a public launch scheduled for the following week, and we weren't sure how soon we'd be able to identify the problem and fix it. Instead, we recommended that the customer increase the resources allocated to their app to the most CPU-rich instance type available. Doing so reduced the app's latency to acceptable levels, though not as low as we'd prefer. We concluded that the latency mitigation was good enough that the team could
conduct their launch successfully, then investigate at leisure.75
At this point, we suspected that the app was a victim of yet another common cause of sudden increases in latency and resource usage: a change in the type of work. We'd seen an increase in writes to the datastore from the app, just before its latency increased, but because this increase wasn't very large-nor was it sustained-we'd written it off as coincidental. However, this behavior did resemble a common pattern: an instance of the app is initialized by reading objects from the datastore, then storing them in the instance's memory. By doing so, the instance avoids reading rarely changing configuration from the datastore on each request, and instead checks the in-memory objects. Then, the time it
takes to handle requests will often scale with the amount of configuration data.76 We couldn't prove that this behavior was the root of the problem, but it's a common antipattern.

The app developers added instrumentation to understand where the app was spending its time. They identified a method that was called on every request, that checked whether a user had whitelisted access to a given path. The method used a caching layer that sought to minimize accesses to both the datastore and the memcache service, by holding whitelist objects in instances' memory. As one of the app's developers noted in the investigation, "I don't know where the fire is yet, but I'm blinded by smoke coming from this whitelist cache."
Some time later, the root cause was found: due to a long-standing bug in the app's access control system, whenever one specific path was accessed, a whitelist object would be created and stored in the datastore. In the run-up to launch, an automated security scanner had been testing the app for vulnerabilities, and as a side effect, its scan produced thousands of whitelist objects over the course of half an hour. These superfluous whitelist objects then had to be checked on every request to the app, which led to pathologically slow responses-without causing any RPC calls from the app to other services. Fixing the bug and removing those objects returned the app's performance to expected levels.

Making Troubleshooting Easier
There are many ways to simplify and speed troubleshooting. Perhaps the most fundamental are:
Building observability-with both white-box metrics and structured logs- into each component from the ground up
Designing systems with well-understood and observable interfaces between components.
Ensuring that information is available in a consistent way throughout a system- for instance, using a unique request identifier throughout the span of RPCs generated by various components-reduces the need to figure out which log entry on an upstream component matches a log entry on a downstream component, speeding the time to diagnosis and recovery.
Problems in correctly representing the state of reality in a code change or an environment change often lead to a need to troubleshoot. Simplifying, controlling, and logging such changes can reduce the need for troubleshooting, and make it easier when it happens.

Conclusion
We've looked at some steps you can take to make the troubleshooting process clear and understandable to novices, so that they, too, can become effective at solving problems. Adopting a systematic approach to troubleshooting-as opposed to relying on luck or experience-can help bound your services' time to recovery, leading to a better experience for your users.

58Indeed, using only first principles and troubleshooting skills is often an effective way to learn how a system works; see Accelerating SREs to On-Call and Beyond.

59See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypothetico-deductive_model.
60For instance, exported variables as described in Practical Alerting from Time- Series Data.

61Attributed to Theodore Woodward, of the University of Maryland School of Medicine, in the 1940s. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zebra_(medicine). This works in some domains, but in some systems, entire classes of failures may be eliminable: for instance, using a well-designed cluster filesystem means that a latency problem is unlikely to be due to a single dead disk.

62Occam's Razor; see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Occam%27s_razor. But remember that it may still be the case that there are multiple problems; in particular, it may be more likely that a system has a number of common low- grade problems that, taken together, explain all the symptoms rather than a single rare problem that causes them all. Cf https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hickam%27s_dictum.

63Of course, see https://xkcd.com/552.
64At least, we have no plausible theory to explain why the number of PhDs awarded in Computer Science in the US should be extremely well correlated (r2
= 0.9416) with the per capita consumption of cheese, between 2000 and 2009:
http://tylervigen.com/view_correlation?id=1099.

65It may be useful to refer prospective bug reporters to [Tat99] to help them

provide high-quality problem reports.

66But beware false correlations that can lead you down wrong paths!
67In many respects, this is similar to the "Five Whys" technique [Ohn88] introduced by Taiichi Ohno to understand the root causes of manufacturing errors.

68In contrast to RE2, PCRE can require exponential time to evaluate some regular expressions. RE2 is available at https://github.com/google/re2.

69[All15] observes this is a frequently used heuristic in resolving outages.
70Using a shared document or real-time chat for notes provides a timestamp of when you did something, which is helpful for postmortems. It also shares that information with others, so they're up to speed with the current state of the world and don't need to interrupt your troubleshooting.

71See also Negative Results Are Magic for more on this point.
72See [Mea08] on how to think about systems, and also [Coo00] and [Dek14] on the limitations of finding a single root cause instead of examining the system and its environment for causative factors.

73See https://cloud.google.com/appengine.
74We have compressed and simplified this case study to aid understanding.
75While launching with an unidentified bug isn't ideal, it's often impractical to eliminate all known bugs. Instead, sometimes we have make do with second-best measures and mitigate risk as best we can, using good engineering judgment.

76The datastore lookup can use an index to speed the comparison, but a frequent in-memory implementation is a simple for loop comparison across all the cached objects. If there are only a few objects, it won't matter that this takes linear time-but this can cause a significant increase in latency and resource usage as the number of cached objects grows.

Chapter 13 - Emergency Response
Written by Corey Adam Baye Edited by Diane Bates
Things break; that's life.

Regardless of the stakes involved or the size of an organization, one trait that's vital to the long-term health of an organization, and that consequently sets that organization apart from others, is how the people involved respond to an emergency. Few of us naturally respond well during an emergency. A proper response takes preparation and periodic, pertinent, hands-on training. Establishing and maintaining thorough training and testing processes requires the support of the board and management, in addition to the careful attention of staff. All of these elements are essential in fostering an environment in which teams can spend money, time, energy, and possibly even uptime to ensure that systems, processes, and people respond efficiently during an emergency.
Note that the chapter on postmortem culture discusses the specifics of how to write postmortems in order to make sure that incidents that require emergency response also become a learning opportunity (see Postmortem Culture: Learning from Failure). This chapter provides more concrete examples of such incidents.

What to Do When Systems Break
First of all, don't panic! You aren't alone, and the sky isn't falling. You're a professional and trained to handle this sort of situation. Typically, no one is in physical danger-only those poor electrons are in peril. At the very worst, half of the Internet is down. So take a deep breath...and carry on.
If you feel overwhelmed, pull in more people. Sometimes it may even be necessary to page the entire company. If your company has an incident response process (see Managing Incidents), make sure that you're familiar with it and follow that process.

Test-Induced Emergency

Google has adopted a proactive approach to disaster and emergency testing (see [Kri12]). SREs break our systems, watch how they fail, and make changes to improve reliability and prevent the failures from recurring. Most of the time, these controlled failures go as planned, and the target system and dependent systems behave in roughly the manner we expect. We identify some weaknesses or hidden dependencies and document follow-up actions to rectify the flaws we uncover. However, sometimes our assumptions and the actual results are worlds apart.
Here's one example of a test that unearthed a number of unexpected dependencies.

Details

We wanted to flush out hidden dependencies on a test database within one of our larger distributed MySQL databases. The plan was to block all access to just one database out of a hundred. No one foresaw the results that would unfold.

Response

Within minutes of commencing the test, numerous dependent services reported that both external and internal users were unable to access key systems. Some systems were intermittently or only partially accessible.
Assuming that the test was responsible, SRE immediately aborted the exercise. We attempted to roll back the permissions change, but were unsuccessful. Instead of panicking, we immediately brainstormed how to restore proper access. Using an already tested approach, we restored permissions to the replicas and failovers. In a parallel effort, we reached out to key developers to correct the flaw in the database application layer library.
Within an hour of the original decision, all access was fully restored, and all services were able to connect once again. The broad impact of this test motivated a rapid and thorough fix to the libraries and a plan for periodic retesting to prevent such a major flaw from recurring.

Findings

What went well

Dependent services that were affected by the incident immediately escalated the issues within the company. We assumed, correctly, that our controlled experiment had gotten out of hand and immediately aborted the test.
We were able to fully restore permissions within an hour of the first report, at which time systems started behaving properly. Some teams took a different approach and reconfigured their systems to avoid the test database. These parallel efforts helped to restore service as quickly as possible.
Follow-up action items were resolved quickly and thoroughly to avoid a similar outage, and we instituted periodic testing to ensure that similar flaws do not recur.

What we learned

Although this test was thoroughly reviewed and thought to be well scoped, reality revealed we had an insufficient understanding of this particular interaction among the dependent systems.
We failed to follow the incident response process, which had been put in place only a few weeks before and hadn't been thoroughly disseminated. This process would have ensured that all services and customers were aware of the outage. To avoid similar scenarios in the future, SRE continually refines and tests our incident response tools and processes, in addition to making sure that updates to our incident management procedures are clearly communicated to all relevant parties.
Because we hadn't tested our rollback procedures in a test environment, these procedures were flawed, which lengthened the outage. We now require thorough testing of rollback procedures before such large-scale tests.

Change-Induced Emergency
As you can imagine, Google has a lot of configuration-complex configuration
-and we constantly make changes to that configuration. To prevent breaking our systems outright, we perform numerous tests on configuration changes to make sure they don't result in unexpected and undesired behavior. However, the

scale and complexity of Google's infrastructure make it impossible to anticipate every dependency or interaction; sometimes configuration changes don't go entirely according to plan.
The following is one such example.

Details

A configuration change to the infrastructure that helps protect our services from abuse was pushed globally on a Friday. This infrastructure interacts with essentially all of our externally facing systems, and the change triggered a crash- loop bug in those systems, which caused the entire fleet to begin to crash-loop almost simultaneously. Because Google's internal infrastructure also depends upon our own services, many internal applications suddenly became unavailable as well.

Response

Within seconds, monitoring alerts started firing, indicating that certain sites were down. Some on-call engineers simultaneously experienced what they believed to be a failure of the corporate network and relocated to dedicated secure rooms (panic rooms) with backup access to the production environment. They were joined by additional engineers who were struggling with their corporate access.
Within five minutes of that first configuration push, the engineer responsible for the push, having become aware of the corporate outage but still unaware of the broader outage, pushed another configuration change to roll back the first change. At this point, services began to recover.
Within 10 minutes of the first push, on-call engineers declared an incident and proceeded to follow internal procedures for incident response. They began notifying the rest of the company about the situation. The push engineer informed the on-call engineers that the outage was likely due to the change that had been pushed and later rolled back. Nevertheless, some services experienced unrelated bugs or misconfigurations triggered by the original event and didn't fully recover for up to an hour.

Findings

What went well

There were several factors at play that prevented this incident from resulting in a longer-term outage of many of Google's internal systems.
To begin with, monitoring almost immediately detected and alerted us to the problem. However, it should be noted that in this case, our monitoring was less than ideal: alerts fired repeatedly and constantly, overwhelming the on-calls and spamming regular and emergency communication channels.
Once the problem was detected, incident management generally went well and updates were communicated often and clearly. Our out-of-band communications systems kept everyone connected even while some of the more complicated software stacks were unusable. This experience reminded us why SRE retains highly reliable, low overhead backup systems, which we use regularly.
In addition to these out-of-band communications systems, Google has command- line tools and alternative access methods that enable us to perform updates and roll back changes even when other interfaces are inaccessible. These tools and access methods worked well during the outage, with the caveat that engineers needed to be more familiar with the tools and to test them more routinely.
Google's infrastructure provided yet another layer of protection in that the affected system rate-limited how quickly it provided full updates to new clients. This behavior may have throttled the crash-loop and prevented a complete outage, allowing jobs to remain up long enough to service a few requests in between crashes.
Finally, we should not overlook the element of luck in the quick resolution of this incident: the push engineer happened to be following real-time communication channels-an additional level of diligence that's not a normal part of the release process. The push engineer noticed a large number of complaints about corporate access directly following the push and rolled back the change almost immediately. Had this swift rollback not occurred, the outage could have lasted considerably longer, becoming immensely more difficult to troubleshoot.

What we learned

An earlier push of the new feature had involved a thorough canary but didn't trigger the same bug, as it had not exercised a very rare and specific configuration keyword in combination with the new feature. The specific change that triggered this bug wasn't considered risky, and therefore followed a less stringent canary process. When the change was pushed globally, it used the untested keyword/feature combination that triggered the failure.
Ironically, improvements to canarying and automation were slated to become higher priority in the following quarter. This incident immediately raised their priority and reinforced the need for thorough canarying, regardless of the perceived risk.
As one would expect, alerting was vocal during this incident because every location was essentially offline for a few minutes. This disrupted the real work being performed by the on-call engineers and made communication among those involved in the incident more difficult.
Google relies upon our own tools. Much of the software stack that we use for troubleshooting and communicating lies behind jobs that were crash-looping. Had this outage lasted any longer, debugging would have been severely hindered.

Process-Induced Emergency
We have poured a considerable amount of time and energy into the automation that manages our machine fleet. It's amazing how many jobs one can start, stop, or retool across the fleet with very little effort. Sometimes, the efficiency of our automation can be a bit frightening when things do not go quite according to plan.
This is one example where moving fast was not such a good thing.

Details

As part of routine automation testing, two consecutive turndown requests for the same soon-to-be-decommissioned server installation were submitted. In the case of the second turndown request, a subtle bug in the automation sent all of the machines in all of these installations globally to the Diskerase queue, where their hard drives were destined to be wiped; see Automation: Enabling Failure at

Scale for more details.

Response

Soon after the second turndown request was issued, the on-call engineers received a page as the first small server installation was taken offline to be decommissioned. Their investigation determined that the machines had been transferred to the Diskerase queue, so following normal procedure, the on-call engineers drained traffic from the location. Because the machines in that location had been wiped, they were unable to respond to requests. To avoid failing those requests outright, on-call engineers drained traffic away from that location. Traffic was redirected to locations that could properly respond to the requests.
Before long, pagers everywhere were firing for all such server installations around the world. In response, the on-call engineers disabled all team automation in order to prevent further damage. They stopped or froze additional automation and production maintenance shortly thereafter.
Within an hour, all traffic had been diverted to other locations. Although users may have experienced elevated latencies, their requests were fulfilled. The outage was officially over.
Now the hard part began: recovery. Some network links were reporting heavy congestion, so network engineers implemented mitigations as choke points surfaced. A server installation in one such location was chosen to be the first of many to rise from the ashes. Within three hours of the initial outage, and thanks to the tenacity of several engineers, the installation was rebuilt and brought back online, happily accepting user requests once again.
US teams handed off to their European counterparts, and SRE hatched a plan to prioritize reinstallations using a streamlined but manual process. The team was divided into three parts, with each part responsible for one step in the manual reinstall process. Within three days, the vast majority of capacity was back online, while any stragglers would be recovered over the next month or two.

Findings

What went well

Reverse proxies in large server installations are managed very differently than reverse proxies in these small installations, so large installations were not impacted. On-call engineers were able to quickly move traffic from smaller installations to large installations. By design, these large installations can handle a full load without difficulty. However, some network links became congested, and therefore required network engineers to develop workarounds. In order to reduce the impact on end users, on-call engineers targeted congested networks as their highest priority.
The turndown process for the small installations worked efficiently and well. From start to finish, it took less than an hour to successfully turn down and securely wipe a large number of these installations.
Although turndown automation quickly tore down monitoring for the small installations, on-call engineers were able to promptly revert those monitoring changes. Doing so helped them to assess the extent of the damage.
The engineers quickly followed incident response protocols, which had matured considerably in the year since the first outage described in this chapter. Communication and collaboration throughout the company and across teams was superb-a real testament to the incident management program and training. All hands within the respective teams chipped in, bringing their vast experience to bear.

What we learned

The root cause was that the turndown automation server lacked the appropriate sanity checks on the commands it sent. When the server ran again in response to the initial failed turndown, it received an empty response for the machine rack. Instead of filtering the response, it passed the empty filter to the machine database, telling the machine database to Diskerase all machines involved. Yes, sometimes zero does mean all. The machine database complied, so the turndown workflow started churning through the machines as quickly as possible.
Reinstallations of machines were slow and unreliable. This behavior was due in large part to the use of the Trivial File Transfer Protocol (TFTP) at the lowest network Quality of Service (QoS) from the distant locations. The BIOS for each
machine in the system dealt poorly with the failures.77 Depending on the network cards involved, the BIOS either halted or went into a constant reboot

cycle. They were failing to transfer the boot files on each cycle and were further taxing the installers. On-call engineers were able to fix these reinstall problems by reclassifying installation traffic at slightly higher priority and using automation to restart any machines that were stuck.
The machine reinstallation infrastructure was unable to handle the simultaneous setup of thousands of machines. This inability was partly due to a regression that prevented the infrastructure from running more than two setup tasks per worker machine. The regression also used improper QoS settings to transfer files and had poorly tuned timeouts. It forced kernel reinstallation, even on machines that still had the proper kernel and on which Diskerase had yet to occur. To remedy this situation, on-call engineers escalated to parties responsible for this infrastructure who were able to quickly retune it to support this unusual load.

All Problems Have Solutions
Time and experience have shown that systems will not only break, but will break in ways that one could never previously imagine. One of the greatest lessons Google has learned is that a solution exists, even if it may not be obvious, especially to the person whose pager is screaming. If you can't think of a solution, cast your net farther. Involve more of your teammates, seek help, do whatever you have to do, but do it quickly. The highest priority is to resolve the issue at hand quickly. Oftentimes, the person with the most state is the one whose actions somehow triggered the event. Utilize that person.
Very importantly, once the emergency has been mitigated, do not forget to set aside time to clean up, write up the incident, and to...

Learn from the Past. Don't Repeat It.
Keep a History of Outages

There is no better way to learn than to document what has broken in the past. History is about learning from everyone's mistakes. Be thorough, be honest, but most of all, ask hard questions. Look for specific actions that might prevent such an outage from recurring, not just tactically, but also strategically. Ensure that everyone within the company can learn what you have learned by publishing and organizing postmortems.

Hold yourself and others accountable to following up on the specific actions detailed in these postmortems. Doing so will prevent a future outage that's nearly identical to, and caused by nearly the same triggers as, an outage that has already been documented. Once you have a solid track record for learning from past outages, see what you can do to prevent future ones.

Ask the Big, Even Improbable, Questions: What If...?

There is no greater test than reality. Ask yourself some big, open-ended questions. What if the building power fails...? What if the network equipment racks are standing in two feet of water...? What if the primary datacenter suddenly goes dark...? What if someone compromises your web server...? What do you do? Who do you call? Who will write the check? Do you have a plan? Do you know how to react? Do you know how your systems will react? Could you minimize the impact if it were to happen now? Could the person sitting next to you do the same?

Encourage Proactive Testing

When it comes to failures, theory and reality are two very different realms. Until your system has actually failed, you don't truly know how that system, its dependent systems, or your users will react. Don't rely on assumptions or what you can't or haven't tested. Would you prefer that a failure happen at 2 a.m. Saturday morning when most of the company is still away on a team-building offsite in the Black Forest-or when you have your best and brightest close at hand, monitoring the test that they painstakingly reviewed in the previous weeks?

Conclusion
We've reviewed three different cases where parts of our systems broke. Although all three emergencies were triggered differently-one by a proactive test, another by a configuration change, and yet another by turndown automation
-the responses shared many characteristics. The responders didn't panic. They pulled in others when they thought it necessary. The responders studied and learned from earlier outages. Subsequently, they built their systems to better respond to those types of outages. Each time new failure modes presented themselves, responders documented those failure modes. This follow-up helped

other teams learn how to better troubleshoot and fortify their systems against similar outages. Responders proactively tested their systems. Such testing ensured that the changes fixed the underlying problems, and identified other weaknesses before they became outages.
And as our systems evolve the cycle continues, with each outage or test resulting in incremental improvements to both processes and systems. While the case studies in this chapter are specific to Google, this approach to emergency response can be applied over time to any organization of any size.

77BIOS: Basic Input/Output System. BIOS is the software built into a computer to send simple instructions to the hardware, allowing input and output before the operating system has been loaded.

Chapter 14 - Managing Incidents
Written by Andrew Stribblehill78 Edited by Kavita Guliani
Effective incident management is key to limiting the disruption caused by an incident and restoring normal business operations as quickly as possible. If you haven't gamed out your response to potential incidents in advance, principled incident management can go out the window in real-life situations.
This chapter walks through a portrait of an incident that spirals out of control due to ad hoc incident management practices, outlines a well-managed approach to the incident, and reviews how the same incident might have played out if handled with well-functioning incident management.

Unmanaged Incidents
Put yourself in the shoes of Mary, the on-call engineer for The Firm. It's 2 p.m. on a Thursday afternoon and your pager has just exploded. Black-box monitoring tells you that your service has stopped serving any traffic in an entire datacenter. With a sigh, you put down your coffee and set about the job of fixing it. A few minutes into the task, another alert tells you that a second datacenter has stopped serving. Then the third out of your five datacenters fails. To exacerbate the situation, there is more traffic than the remaining datacenters can handle, so they start to overload. Before you know it, the service is overloaded and unable to serve any requests.
You stare at the logs for what seems like an eternity. Thousands of lines of logging suggest there's an error in one of the recently updated modules, so you decide to revert the servers to the previous release. When you see that the rollback hasn't helped, you call Josephine, who wrote most of the code for the now-hemorrhaging service. Reminding you that it's 3:30 a.m. in her time zone, she blearily agrees to log in and take a look. Your colleagues Sabrina and Robin start poking around from their own terminals. "Just looking," they tell you.
Now one of the suits has phoned your boss and is angrily demanding to know

why he wasn't informed about the "total meltdown of this business-critical service." Independently, the vice presidents are nagging you for an ETA, repeatedly asking you, "How could this possibly have happened?" You would sympathize, but doing so would require cognitive effort that you are holding in reserve for your job. The VPs call on their prior engineering experience and make irrelevant but hard-to-refute comments like, "Increase the page size!"
Time passes; the two remaining datacenters fail completely. Unbeknown to you, sleep-addled Josephine called Malcolm. He had a brainwave: something about CPU affinity. He felt certain that he could optimize the remaining server processes if he could just deploy this one simple change to the production environment, so he did so. Within seconds, the servers restarted, picking up the change. And then died.

The Anatomy of an Unmanaged Incident
Note that everybody in the preceding scenario was doing their job, as they saw it. How could things go so wrong? A few common hazards caused this incident to spiral out of control.

Sharp Focus on the Technical Problem

We tend to hire people like Mary for their technical prowess. So it's not surprising that she was busy making operational changes to the system, trying valiantly to solve the problem. She wasn't in a position to think about the bigger picture of how to mitigate the problem because the technical task at hand was overwhelming.

Poor Communication

For the same reason, Mary was far too busy to communicate clearly. Nobody knew what actions their coworkers were taking. Business leaders were angry, customers were frustrated, and other engineers who could have lent a hand in debugging or fixing the issue weren't used effectively.

Freelancing

Malcolm was making changes to the system with the best of intentions.

However, he didn't coordinate with his coworkers-not even Mary, who was technically in charge of troubleshooting. His changes made a bad situation far worse.

Elements of Incident Management Process
Incident management skills and practices exist to channel the energies of enthusiastic individuals. Google's incident management system is based on the Incident Command System,79 which is known for its clarity and scalability.
A well-designed incident management process has the following features.

Recursive Separation of Responsibilities

It's important to make sure that everybody involved in the incident knows their role and doesn't stray onto someone else's turf. Somewhat counterintuitively, a clear separation of responsibilities allows individuals more autonomy than they might otherwise have, since they need not second-guess their colleagues.
If the load on a given member becomes excessive, that person needs to ask the planning lead for more staff. They should then delegate work to others, a task that might entail creating subincidents. Alternatively, a role leader might delegate system components to colleagues, who report high-level information back up to the leaders.
Several distinct roles should be delegated to particular individuals: Incident Command
The incident commander holds the high-level state about the incident. They structure the incident response task force, assigning responsibilities according to need and priority. De facto, the commander holds all positions that they have not delegated. If appropriate, they can remove roadblocks that prevent Ops from working most effectively.
Operational Work

The Ops lead works with the incident commander to respond to the incident by applying operational tools to the task at hand. The operations team

should be the only group modifying the system during an incident.

Communication

This person is the public face of the incident response task force. Their duties most definitely include issuing periodic updates to the incident response team and stakeholders (usually via email), and may extend to tasks such as keeping the incident document accurate and up to date.
Planning

The planning role supports Ops by dealing with longer-term issues, such as filing bugs, ordering dinner, arranging handoffs, and tracking how the system has diverged from the norm so it can be reverted once the incident is resolved.

A Recognized Command Post

Interested parties need to understand where they can interact with the incident commander. In many situations, locating the incident task force members into a central designated "War Room" is appropriate. Others teams may prefer to work at their desks, keeping alert to incident updates via email and IRC.
Google has found IRC to be a huge boon in incident response. IRC is very reliable and can be used as a log of communications about this event, and such a record is invaluable in keeping detailed state changes in mind. We've also written bots that log incident-related traffic (which is helpful for postmortem analysis), and other bots that log events such as alerts to the channel. IRC is also a convenient medium over which geographically distributed teams can coordinate.

Live Incident State Document

The incident commander's most important responsibility is to keep a living incident document. This can live in a wiki, but should ideally be editable by several people concurrently. Most of our teams use Google Docs, though Google Docs SRE use Google Sites: after all, depending on the software you are trying to fix as part of your incident management system is unlikely to end well.

See Example Incident State Document for a sample incident document. This living doc can be messy, but must be functional. Using a template makes generating this documentation easier, and keeping the most important information at the top makes it more usable. Retain this documentation for postmortem analysis and, if necessary, meta analysis.

Clear, Live Handoff

It's essential that the post of incident commander be clearly handed off at the end of the working day. If you're handing off command to someone at another location, you can simply and safely update the new incident commander over the phone or a video call. Once the new incident commander is fully apprised, the outgoing commander should be explicit in their handoff, specifically stating, "You're now the incident commander, okay?", and should not leave the call until receiving firm acknowledgment of handoff. The handoff should be communicated to others working on the incident so that it's clear who is leading the incident management efforts at all times.

A Managed Incident
Now let's examine how this incident might have played out if it were handled using principles of incident management.
It's 2 p.m., and Mary is into her third coffee of the day. The pager's harsh tone surprises her, and she gulps the drink down. Problem: a datacenter has stopped serving traffic. She starts to investigate. Shortly another alert fires, and the second datacenter out of five is out of order. Because this is a rapidly growing issue, she knows that she'll benefit from the structure of her incident management framework.
Mary snags Sabrina. "Can you take command?" Nodding her agreement, Sabrina quickly gets a rundown of what's occurred thus far from Mary. She captures these details in an email that she sends to a prearranged mailing list. Sabrina recognizes that she can't yet scope the impact of the incident, so she asks for Mary's assessment. Mary responds, "Users have yet to be impacted; let's just hope we don't lose a third datacenter." Sabrina records Mary's response in a live incident document.

When the third alert fires, Sabrina sees the alert among the debugging chatter on IRC and quickly follows up to the email thread with an update. The thread keeps VPs abreast of the high-level status without bogging them down in minutiae. Sabrina asks an external communications representative to start drafting user messaging. She then follows up with Mary to see if they should contact the developer on-call (currently Josephine). Receiving Mary's approval, Sabrina loops in Josephine.
By the time Josephine logs in, Robin has already volunteered to help out. Sabrina reminds both Robin and Josephine that they are to prioritize any tasks delegated to them by Mary, and that they must keep Mary informed of any additional actions they take. Robin and Josephine quickly familiarize themselves with the current situation by reading the incident document.
By now, Mary has tried the old binary release and found it wanting: she mutters this to Robin, who updates IRC to say that this attempted fix didn't work. Sabrina pastes this update into the live incident management document.
At 5 p.m., Sabrina starts finding replacement staff to take on the incident, as she and her colleagues are about to go home. She updates the incident document. A brief phone conference takes place at 5:45 so everyone is aware of the current situation. At 6 p.m., they hand off their responsibilities to their colleagues in the sister office.
Mary returns to work the following morning to find that her transatlantic colleagues have assumed responsibility for the bug, mitigated the problem, closed the incident, and started work on the postmortem. Problem solved, she brews some fresh coffee and settles down to plan structural improvements so problems of this category don't afflict the team again.

When to Declare an Incident
It is better to declare an incident early and then find a simple fix and close out the incident than to have to spin up the incident management framework hours into a burgeoning problem. Set clear conditions for declaring an incident. My team follows these broad guidelines-if any of the following is true, the event is an incident:
Do you need to involve a second team in fixing the problem?

Is the outage visible to customers?
Is the issue unsolved even after an hour's concentrated analysis?

Incident management proficiency atrophies quickly when it's not in constant use. So how can engineers keep their incident management skills up to date- handle more incidents? Fortunately, the incident management framework can apply to other operational changes that need to span time zones and/or teams. If you use the framework frequently as a regular part of your change management procedures, you can easily follow this framework when an actual incident occurs. If your organization performs disaster-recovery testing (you should, it's fun: see [Kri12]), incident management should be part of that testing process. We often role-play the response to an on-call issue that has already been solved, perhaps by colleagues in another location, to further familiarize ourselves with incident management.

In Summary
We've found that by formulating an incident management strategy in advance, structuring this plan to scale smoothly, and regularly putting the plan to use, we were able to reduce our mean time to recovery and provide staff a less stressful way to work on emergent problems. Any organization concerned with reliability would benefit from pursuing a similar strategy.

Best Practices for Incident Management


Prioritize.Stop the bleeding, restore service, and preserve the evidence for root- causing.
Prepare.Develop and document your incident management procedures in advance, in consultation with incident participants.
Trust.Give full autonomy within the assigned role to all incident participants.

Introspect.Pay attention to your emotional state while responding to an incident. If you start to feel panicky or overwhelmed, solicit more support.
Consider alternatives.Periodically consider your options and re-evaluate whether it still makes sense to continue what you're doing or whether you should be taking another tack in incident response.

Practice.Use the process routinely so it becomes second nature.

Change it around.Were you incident commander last time? Take on a different role this time. Encourage every team member to acquire familiarity with each role.

78An earlier version of this chapter appeared as an article in ;login: (April 2015, vol. 40, no. 2).

79See http://www.fema.gov/national-incident-management-system for further details.

Chapter 15 - Postmortem Culture: Learning from Failure Appendix D - Example Postmortem
Written by John Lunney and Sue Lueder Edited by Gary O' Connor
The cost of failure is education. Devin Carraway
As SREs, we work with large-scale, complex, distributed systems. We constantly enhance our services with new features and add new systems. Incidents and outages are inevitable given our scale and velocity of change. When an incident occurs, we fix the underlying issue, and services return to their normal operating conditions. Unless we have some formalized process of learning from these incidents in place, they may recur ad infinitum. Left unchecked, incidents can multiply in complexity or even cascade, overwhelming a system and its operators and ultimately impacting our users. Therefore, postmortems are an essential tool for SRE.
The postmortem concept is well known in the technology industry [All12]. A postmortem is a written record of an incident, its impact, the actions taken to mitigate or resolve it, the root cause(s), and the follow-up actions to prevent the incident from recurring. This chapter describes criteria for deciding when to conduct postmortems, some best practices around postmortems, and advice on how to cultivate a postmortem culture based on the experience we've gained over the years.

Google's Postmortem Philosophy
The primary goals of writing a postmortem are to ensure that the incident is documented, that all contributing root cause(s) are well understood, and, especially, that effective preventive actions are put in place to reduce the

likelihood and/or impact of recurrence. A detailed survey of root-cause analysis techniques is beyond the scope of this chapter (instead, see [Roo04]); however, articles, best practices, and tools abound in the system quality domain. Our teams use a variety of techniques for root-cause analysis and choose the technique best suited to their services. Postmortems are expected after any significant undesirable event. Writing a postmortem is not punishment-it is a learning opportunity for the entire company. The postmortem process does present an inherent cost in terms of time or effort, so we are deliberate in choosing when to write one. Teams have some internal flexibility, but common postmortem triggers include:
User-visible downtime or degradation beyond a certain threshold Data loss of any kind
On-call engineer intervention (release rollback, rerouting of traffic, etc.) A resolution time above some threshold
A monitoring failure (which usually implies manual incident discovery)

It is important to define postmortem criteria before an incident occurs so that everyone knows when a postmortem is necessary. In addition to these objective triggers, any stakeholder may request a postmortem for an event.
Blameless postmortems are a tenet of SRE culture. For a postmortem to be truly blameless, it must focus on identifying the contributing causes of the incident without indicting any individual or team for bad or inappropriate behavior. A blamelessly written postmortem assumes that everyone involved in an incident had good intentions and did the right thing with the information they had. If a culture of finger pointing and shaming individuals or teams for doing the "wrong" thing prevails, people will not bring issues to light for fear of punishment.
Blameless culture originated in the healthcare and avionics industries where mistakes can be fatal. These industries nurture an environment where every "mistake" is seen as an opportunity to strengthen the system. When postmortems shift from allocating blame to investigating the systematic reasons why an individual or team had incomplete or incorrect information, effective prevention plans can be put in place. You can't "fix" people, but you can fix systems and processes to better support people making the right choices when designing and maintaining complex systems.

When an outage does occur, a postmortem is not written as a formality to be forgotten. Instead the postmortem is seen by engineers as an opportunity not only to fix a weakness, but to make Google more resilient as a whole. While a blameless postmortem doesn't simply vent frustration by pointing fingers, it should call out where and how services can be improved. Here are two examples:
Pointing fingers

"We need to rewrite the entire complicated backend system! It's been breaking weekly for the last three quarters and I'm sure we're all tired of fixing things onesy-twosy. Seriously, if I get paged one more time I'll rewrite it myself..."
Blameless

"An action item to rewrite the entire backend system might actually prevent these annoying pages from continuing to happen, and the maintenance manual for this version is quite long and really difficult to be fully trained up on. I'm sure our future on-callers will thank us!"

Best Practice: Avoid Blame and Keep It Constructive


Blameless postmortems can be challenging to write, because the postmortem format clearly identifies the actions that led to the incident. Removing blame from a postmortem gives people the confidence to escalate issues without fear. It is also important not to stigmatize frequent production of postmortems by a person or team. An atmosphere of blame risks creating a culture in which incidents and issues are swept under the rug, leading to greater risk for the organization [Boy13].

Collaborate and Share Knowledge
We value collaboration, and the postmortem process is no exception. The postmortem workflow includes collaboration and knowledge-sharing at every stage.
Our postmortem documents are Google Docs, with an in-house template (see Example Postmortem). Regardless of the specific tool you use, look for the

following key features:

Real-time collaboration

Enables the rapid collection of data and ideas. Essential during the early creation of a postmortem.
An open commenting/annotation system

Makes crowdsourcing solutions easy and improves coverage.

Email notifications

Can be directed at collaborators within the document or used to loop in others to provide input.
Writing a postmortem also involves formal review and publication. In practice, teams share the first postmortem draft internally and solicit a group of senior engineers to assess the draft for completeness. Review criteria might include:
Was key incident data collected for posterity? Are the impact assessments complete?
Was the root cause sufficiently deep?
Is the action plan appropriate and are resulting bug fixes at appropriate priority?
Did we share the outcome with relevant stakeholders?

Once the initial review is complete, the postmortem is shared more broadly, typically with the larger engineering team or on an internal mailing list. Our goal is to share postmortems to the widest possible audience that would benefit from the knowledge or lessons imparted. Google has stringent rules around access to
any piece of information that might identify an end-user,80 and even internal documents like postmortems never include such information.

Best Practice: No Postmortem Left Unreviewed


An unreviewed postmortem might as well never have existed. To ensure that each completed draft is reviewed, we encourage regular review sessions for postmortems. In these meetings, it is important to close out any ongoing discussions and comments, to capture ideas, and to finalize the state.

Once those involved are satisfied with the document and its action items, the postmortem is added to a team or organization repository of past incidents.81 Transparent sharing makes it easier for others to find and learn from the postmortem.

Introducing a Postmortem Culture
Introducing a postmortem culture to your organization is easier said than done; such an effort requires continuous cultivation and reinforcement. We reinforce a collaborative postmortem culture through senior management's active participation in the review and collaboration process. Management can encourage this culture, but blameless postmortems are ideally the product of engineer self-motivation. In the spirit of nurturing the postmortem culture, SREs proactively create activities that disseminate what we learn about system infrastructure. Some example activities include:
Postmortem of the month

In a monthly newsletter, an interesting and well-written postmortem is shared with the entire organization.
Google+ postmortem group

This group shares and discusses internal and external postmortems, best practices, and commentary about postmortems.
Postmortem reading clubs

Teams host regular postmortem reading clubs, in which an interesting or impactful postmortem is brought to the table (along with some tasty refreshments) for an open dialogue with participants, nonparticipants, and new Googlers about what happened, what lessons the incident imparted, and the aftermath of the incident. Often, the postmortem being reviewed is months or years old!
Wheel of Misfortune

New SREs are often treated to the Wheel of Misfortune exercise (see Disaster Role Playing), in which a previous postmortem is reenacted with a

cast of engineers playing roles as laid out in the postmortem. The original incident commander attends to help make the experience as "real" as possible.
One of the biggest challenges of introducing postmortems to an organization is that some may question their value given the cost of their preparation. The following strategies can help in facing this challenge:
Ease postmortems into the workflow. A trial period with several complete and successful postmortems may help prove their value, in addition to helping to identify what criteria should initiate a postmortem.
Make sure that writing effective postmortems is a rewarded and celebrated practice, both publicly through the social methods mentioned earlier, and through individual and team performance management.
Encourage senior leadership's acknowledgment and participation. Even Larry Page talks about the high value of postmortems!

Best Practice: Visibly Reward People for Doing the Right Thing


Google's founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin host TGIF, a weekly all-hands held live at our headquarters in Mountain View, California, and broadcast to Google offices around the world. A 2014 TGIF focused on "The Art of the Postmortem," which featured SRE discussion of high-impact incidents. One SRE discussed a release he had recently pushed; despite thorough testing, an unexpected interaction inadvertently took down a critical service for four minutes. The incident only lasted four minutes because the SRE had the presence of mind to roll back the change immediately, averting a much longer
and larger-scale outage. Not only did this engineer receive two peer bonuses82 immediately afterward in recognition of his quick and level-headed handling of the incident, but he also received a huge round of applause from the TGIF audience, which included the company's founders and an audience of Googlers numbering in the thousands. In addition to such a visible forum, Google has an array of internal social networks that drive peer praise toward well-written postmortems and exceptional incident handling. This is one example of many where recognition of these contributions comes from peers, CEOs, and everyone
in between.83

Best Practice: Ask for Feedback on Postmortem Effectiveness

At Google, we strive to address problems as they arise and share innovations internally. We regularly survey our teams on how the postmortem process is supporting their goals and how the process might be improved. We ask questions such as: Is the culture supporting your work? Does writing a postmortem entail too much toil (see Eliminating Toil)? What best practices does your team recommend for other teams? What kinds of tools would you like to see developed? The survey results give the SREs in the trenches the opportunity to ask for improvements that will increase the effectiveness of the postmortem culture.
Beyond the operational aspects of incident management and follow-up, postmortem practice has been woven into the culture at Google: it's now a cultural norm that any significant incident is followed by a comprehensive postmortem.

Conclusion and Ongoing Improvements
We can say with confidence that thanks to our continuous investment in cultivating a postmortem culture, Google weathers fewer outages and fosters a better user experience. Our "Postmortems at Google" working group is one example of our commitment to the culture of blameless postmortems. This group coordinates postmortem efforts across the company: pulling together postmortem templates, automating postmortem creation with data from tools used during an incident, and helping automate data extraction from postmortems so we can perform trend analysis. We've been able to collaborate on best practices from products as disparate as YouTube, Google Fiber, Gmail, Google Cloud, AdWords, and Google Maps. While these products are quite diverse, they all conduct postmortems with the universal goal of learning from our darkest hours.
With a large number of postmortems produced each month across Google, tools to aggregate postmortems are becoming more and more useful. These tools help us identify common themes and areas for improvement across product boundaries. To facilitate comprehension and automated analysis, we have recently enhanced our postmortem template (see Example Postmortem) with additional metadata fields. Future work in this domain includes machine learning to help predict our weaknesses, facilitate real-time incident investigation, and reduce duplicate incidents.

80See http://www.google.com/policies/privacy/.
81If you'd like to start your own repository, Etsy has released Morgue, a tool for managing postmortems.

82Google's Peer Bonus program is a way for fellow Googlers to recognize colleagues for exceptional efforts and involves a token cash reward.

83For further discussion of this particular incident, see Emergency Response.

Chapter 16 - Tracking Outages
Written by Gabe Krabbe Edited by Lisa Carey
Improving reliability over time is only possible if you start from a known baseline and can track progress. "Outalator," our outage tracker, is one of the tools we use to do just that. Outalator is a system that passively receives all alerts sent by our monitoring systems and allows us to annotate, group, and analyze this data.
Systematically learning from past problems is essential to effective service management. Postmortems (see Postmortem Culture: Learning from Failure) provide detailed information for individual outages, but they are only part of the answer. They are only written for incidents with a large impact, so issues that have individually small impact but are frequent and widespread don't fall within their scope. Similarly, postmortems tend to provide useful insights for improving a single service or set of services, but may miss opportunities that would have a small effect in individual cases, or opportunities that have a poor cost/benefit
ratio, but that would have large horizontal impact.84
We can also get useful information from questions such as, "How many alerts per on-call shift does this team get?", "What's the ratio of actionable/nonactionable alerts over the last quarter?", or even simply "Which of the services this team manages creates the most toil?"

Escalator
At Google, all alert notifications for SRE share a central replicated system that tracks whether a human has acknowledged receipt of the notification. If no acknowledgment is received after a configured interval, the system escalates to the next configured destination(s)-e.g., from primary on-call to secondary. This system, called "The Escalator," was initially designed as a largely transparent tool that received copies of emails sent to on-call aliases. This functionality allowed Escalator to easily integrate with existing workflows without requiring any change in user behavior (or, at the time, monitoring system behavior).

Outalator
Following Escalator's example, where we added useful features to existing infrastructure, we created a system that would deal not just with the individual escalating notifications, but with the next layer of abstraction: outages.
Outalator lets users view a time-interleaved list of notifications for multiple queues at once, instead of requiring a user to switch between queues manually. Figure 16-1 shows multiple queues as they appear in Outalator's queue view. This functionality is handy because frequently a single SRE team is the primary point of contact for services with distinct secondary escalation targets, usually the developer teams.

Figure 16-1. Outalator queue view

Outalator stores a copy of the original notification and allows annotating incidents. For convenience, it silently receives and saves a copy of any email replies as well. Because some follow-ups are less helpful than others (for example, a reply-all sent with the sole purpose of adding more recipients to the cc list), annotations can be marked as "important." If an annotation is important, other parts of the message are collapsed into the interface to cut down on clutter. Together, this provides more context when referring to an incident than a possibly fragmented email thread.
Multiple escalating notifications ("alerts") can be combined into a single entity ("incident") in the Outalator. These notifications may be related to the same single incident, may be otherwise unrelated and uninteresting auditable events such as privileged database access, or may be spurious monitoring failures. This grouping functionality, shown in Figure 16-2, unclutters the overview displays

and allows for separate analysis of "incidents per day" versus "alerts per day."

Figure 16-2. Outalator view of an incident

Building Your Own Outalator


Many organizations use messaging systems like Slack, Hipchat, or even IRC for internal communication and/or updating status dashboards. These systems are great places to hook into with a system like Outalator.

Aggregation

A single event may, and often will, trigger multiple alerts. For example, network failures cause timeouts and unreachable backend services for everyone, so all affected teams receive their own alerts, including the owners of backend

services; meanwhile, the network operations center will have its own klaxons ringing. However, even smaller issues affecting a single service may trigger multiple alerts due to multiple error conditions being diagnosed. While it is worthwhile to attempt to minimize the number of alerts triggered by a single event, triggering multiple alerts is unavoidable in most trade-off calculations between false positives and false negatives.
The ability to group multiple alerts together into a single incident is critical in dealing with this duplication. Sending an email saying "this is the same thing as that other thing; they are symptoms of the same incident" works for a given alert: it can prevent duplication of debugging or panic. But sending an email for each alert is not a practical or scalable solution for handling duplicate alerts within a team, let alone between teams or over longer periods of time.

Tagging

Of course, not every alerting event is an incident. False-positive alerts occur, as well as test events or mistargeted emails from humans. The Outalator itself does not distinguish between these events, but it allows general-purpose tagging to add metadata to notifications, at any level. Tags are mostly free-form, single "words." Colons, however, are interpreted as semantic separators, which subtly promotes the use of hierarchical namespaces and allows some automatic treatment. This namespacing is supported by suggested tag prefixes, primarily "cause" and "action," but the list is team-specific and generated based on historical usage. For example, "cause:network" might be sufficient information for some teams, whereas another team might opt for more specific tags, such as "cause:network:switch" versus "cause:network:cable." Some teams may frequently use "customer:132456"-style tags, so "customer" would be suggested for those teams, but not for others.
Tags can be parsed and turned into a convenient link ("bug:76543" links to the bug tracking system). Other tags are just a single word ("bogus" is widely used for false positives). Of course, some tags are typos ("cause:netwrok") and some tags aren't particularly helpful ("problem-went-away"), but avoiding a predetermined list and allowing teams to find their own preferences and standards will result in a more useful tool and better data. Overall, tags have been a remarkably powerful tool for teams to obtain and provide an overview of a given service's pain points, even without much, or even any, formal analysis. As trivial as tagging appears, it is probably one of the Outalator's most useful

unique features.

Analysis

Of course, SRE does much more than just react to incidents. Historical data is useful when one is responding to an incident-the question "what did we do last time?" is always a good starting point. But historical information is far more useful when it concerns systemic, periodic, or other wider problems that may exist. Enabling such analysis is one of the most important functions of an outage tracking tool.
The bottom layer of analysis encompasses counting and basic aggregate statistics for reporting. The details depend on the team, but include information such as incidents per week/month/quarter and alerts per incident. The next layer is more important, and easy to provide: comparison between teams/services and over time to identify first patterns and trends. This layer allows teams to determine whether a given alert load is "normal" relative to their own track record and that of other services. "That's the third time this week" can be good or bad, but knowing whether "it" used to happen five times per day or five times per month allows interpretation.
The next step in data analysis is finding wider issues, which are not just raw counts but require some semantic analysis. For example, identifying the infrastructure component causing most incidents, and therefore the potential benefit  from  increasing  the  stability  or  performance  of  this  component,85
assumes that there is a straightforward way to provide this information alongside the incident records. As a simple example: different teams have service-specific alert conditions such as "stale data" or "high latency." Both conditions may be caused by network congestion leading to database replication delays and need intervention. Or, they could be within the nominal service level objective, but are failing to meet the higher expectations of users. Examining this information across multiple teams allows us to identify systemic problems and choose the correct solution, especially if the solution may be the introduction of more artificial failures to stop over-performing.

Reporting and communication

Of more immediate use to frontline SREs is the ability to select zero or more

outalations and include their subjects, tags, and "important" annotations in an email to the next on-call engineer (and an arbitrary cc list) in order to pass on recent state between shifts. For periodic reviews of the production services (which occur weekly for most teams), the Outalator also supports a "report mode," in which the important annotations are expanded inline with the main list in order to provide a quick overview of lowlights.

Unexpected Benefits

Being able to identify that an alert, or a flood of alerts, coincides with a given other outage has obvious benefits: it increases the speed of diagnosis and reduces load on other teams by acknowledging that there is indeed an incident. There are additional nonobvious benefits. To use Bigtable as an example, if a service has a disruption due to an apparent Bigtable incident, but you can see that the Bigtable SRE team has not been alerted, manually alerting the team is probably a good idea. Improved cross-team visibility can and does make a big difference in incident resolution, or at least in incident mitigation.
Some teams across the company have gone so far as to set up dummy escalator configurations: no human receives the notifications sent there, but the notifications appear in the Outalator and can be tagged, annotated, and reviewed. One example for this "system of record" use is to log and audit the use of privileged or role accounts (though it must be noted that this functionality is basic, and used for technical, rather than legal, audits). Another use is to record and automatically annotate runs of periodic jobs that may not be idempotent- for example, automatic application of schema changes from version control to database systems.

84For example, it might take significant engineering effort to make a particular change to Bigtable that only has a small mitigating effect for one outage. However, if that same mitigation were available across many events, the engineering effort may well be worthwhile.

85On the one hand, "most incidents caused" is a good starting point for reducing the number of alerts triggered and improving the overall system. On the other hand, this metric may simply be an artifact of over-sensitive monitoring or a small set of client systems misbehaving or themselves running outside the agreed service level. And on the gripping hand, the number of incidents alone gives no indication as to the difficulty to fix or severity of impact.

Chapter 17 - Testing for Reliability
Written by Alex Perry and Max Luebbe Edited by Diane Bates
If you haven't tried it, assume it's broken. Unknown
One key responsibility of Site Reliability Engineers is to quantify confidence in the systems they maintain. SREs perform this task by adapting classical software testing techniques to systems at scale.86 Confidence can be measured both by past reliability and future reliability. The former is captured by analyzing data
provided by monitoring historic system behavior, while the latter is quantified by making predictions from data about past system behavior. In order for these predictions to be strong enough to be useful, one of the following conditions must hold:
The site remains completely unchanged over time with no software releases or changes in the server fleet, which means that future behavior will be similar to past behavior.
You can confidently describe all changes to the site, in order for analysis to allow for the uncertainty incurred by each of these changes.
Testing is the mechanism you use to demonstrate specific areas of equivalence when changes occur.87 Each test that passes both before and after a change reduces the uncertainty for which the analysis needs to allow. Thorough testing helps us predict the future reliability of a given site with enough detail to be
practically useful.

The amount of testing you need to conduct depends on the reliability requirements for your system. As the percentage of your codebase covered by tests increases, you reduce uncertainty and the potential decrease in reliability from each change. Adequate testing coverage means that you can make more changes before reliability falls below an acceptable level. If you make too many changes too quickly, the predicted reliability approaches the acceptability limit. At this point, you may want to stop making changes while new monitoring data

accumulates. The accumulating data supplements the tested coverage, which validates the reliability being asserted for revised execution paths. Assuming the served clients are randomly distributed [Woo96], sampling statistics can extrapolate from monitored metrics whether the aggregate behavior is making use of new paths. These statistics identify the areas that need better testing or other retrofitting.

Relationships Between Testing and Mean Time to Repair


Passing a test or a series of tests doesn't necessarily prove reliability. However, tests that are failing generally prove the absence of reliability.
A monitoring system can uncover bugs, but only as quickly as the reporting pipeline can react. The Mean Time to Repair (MTTR) measures how long it takes the operations team to fix the bug, either through a rollback or another action.
It's possible for a testing system to identify a bug with zero MTTR. Zero MTTR occurs when a system-level test is applied to a subsystem, and that test detects the exact same problem that monitoring would detect. Such a test enables the push to be blocked so the bug never reaches production (though it still needs to be repaired in the source code). Repairing zero MTTR bugs by blocking a push is both quick and convenient. The more bugs you can find with zero MTTR, the higher the Mean Time Between Failures (MTBF) experienced by your users.
As MTBF increases in response to better testing, developers are encouraged to release features faster. Some of these features will, of course, have bugs. New bugs result in an opposite adjustment to release velocity as these bugs are found and fixed.
Authors writing about software testing largely agree on what coverage is needed. Most conflicts of opinion stem from conflicting terminology, differing emphasis on the impact of testing in each of the software lifecycle phases, or the particularities of the systems on which they've conducted testing. For a discussion about testing at Google in general, see [Whi12]. The following sections specify how software testing-related terminology is used in this chapter.

Types of Software Testing

Software tests broadly fall into two categories: traditional and production. Traditional tests are more common in software development to evaluate the correctness of software offline, during development. Production tests are performed on a live web service to evaluate whether a deployed software system is working correctly.

Traditional Tests

As shown in Figure 17-1, traditional software testing begins with unit tests. Testing of more complex functionality is layered atop unit tests.


Figure 17-1. The hierarchy of traditional tests

Unit tests

A unit test is the smallest and simplest form of software testing. These tests are employed to assess a separable unit of software, such as a class or function, for correctness independent of the larger software system that contains the unit. Unit tests are also employed as a form of specification to ensure that a function or module exactly performs the behavior required by the system. Unit tests are commonly used to introduce test-driven development concepts.

Integration tests

Software components that pass individual unit tests are assembled into larger components. Engineers then run an integration test on an assembled component to verify that it functions correctly. Dependency injection, which is performed with tools such as Dagger,88 is an extremely powerful technique for creating
mocks of complex dependencies so that an engineer can cleanly test a component. A common example of a dependency injection is to replace a stateful database with a lightweight mock that has precisely specified behavior.

System tests

A system test is the largest scale test that engineers run for an undeployed system. All modules belonging to a specific component, such as a server that passed integration tests, are assembled into the system. Then the engineer tests the end-to-end functionality of the system. System tests come in many different flavors:
Smoke tests

Smoke tests, in which engineers test very simple but critical behavior, are among the simplest type of system tests. Smoke tests are also known as sanity testing, and serve to short-circuit additional and more expensive testing.
Performance tests

Once basic correctness is established via a smoke test, a common next step is to write another variant of a system test to ensure that the performance of the system stays acceptable over the duration of its lifecycle. Because

response times for dependencies or resource requirements may change dramatically during the course of development, a system needs to be tested to make sure that it doesn't become incrementally slower without anyone noticing (before it gets released to users). For example, a given program may evolve to need 32 GB of memory when it formerly only needed 8 GB, or a 10 ms response time might turn into 50 ms, and then into 100 ms. A performance test ensures that over time, a system doesn't degrade or become too expensive.
Regression tests

Another type of system test involves preventing bugs from sneaking back into the codebase. Regression tests can be analogized to a gallery of rogue bugs that historically caused the system to fail or produce incorrect results. By documenting these bugs as tests at the system or integration level, engineers refactoring the codebase can be sure that they don't accidentally introduce bugs that they've already invested time and effort to eliminate.
It's important to note that tests have a cost, both in terms of time and computational resources. At one extreme, unit tests are very cheap in both dimensions, as they can usually be completed in milliseconds on the resources available on a laptop. At the other end of the spectrum, bringing up a complete server with required dependencies (or mock equivalents) to run related tests can take significantly more time-from several minutes to multiple hours-and possibly require dedicated computing resources. Mindfulness of these costs is essential to developer productivity, and also encourages more efficient use of testing resources.

Production Tests

Production tests interact with a live production system, as opposed to a system in a hermetic testing environment. These tests are in many ways similar to black- box monitoring (see Monitoring Distributed Systems), and are therefore sometimes called black-box testing. Production tests are essential to running a reliable production service.

Rollouts Entangle Tests


It's often said that testing is (or should be) performed in a hermetic environment

[Nar12]. This statement implies that production is not hermetic. Of course, production usually isn't hermetic, because rollout cadences make live changes to the production environment in small and well-understood chunks.
To manage uncertainty and hide risk from users, changes might not be pushed live in the same order that they were added to source control. Rollouts often happen in stages, using mechanisms that gradually shuffle users around, in addition to monitoring at each stage to ensure that the new environment isn't hitting anticipated yet unexpected problems. As a result, the entire production environment is intentionally not representative of any given version of a binary that's checked into source control.
It's possible for source control to have more than one version of a binary and its associated configuration file waiting to be made live. This scenario can cause problems when tests are conducted against the live environment. For example, the test might use the latest version of a configuration file located in source control along with an older version of the binary that's live. Or it might test an older version of the configuration file and find a bug that's been fixed in a newer version of the file.
Similarly, a system test can use the configuration files to assemble its modules before running the test. If the test passes, but its version is one in which the configuration test (discussed in the following section) fails, the result of the test is valid hermetically, but not operationally. Such an outcome is inconvenient.

Configuration test

At Google, web service configurations are described in files that are stored in our version control system. For each configuration file, a separate configuration test examines production to see how a particular binary is actually configured and reports discrepancies against that file. Such tests are inherently not hermetic, as they operate outside the test infrastructure sandbox.
Configuration tests are built and tested for a specific version of the checked-in configuration file. Comparing which version of the test is passing in relation to the goal version for automation implicitly indicates how far actual production currently lags behind ongoing engineering work.
These nonhermetic configuration tests tend to be especially valuable as part of a

distributed monitoring solution since the pattern of passes/fails across production can identify paths through the service stack that don't have sensible combinations of the local configurations. The monitoring solution's rules try to match paths of actual user requests (from the trace logs) against that set of undesirable paths. Any matches found by the rules become alerts that ongoing releases and/or pushes are not proceeding safely and remedial action is needed.
Configuration tests can be very simple when the production deployment uses the actual file content and offers a real-time query to retrieve a copy of the content. In this case, the test code simply issues that query and diffs the response against the file. The tests become more complex when the configuration does one of the following:
Implicitly incorporates defaults that are built into the binary (meaning that the tests are separately versioned as a result)
Passes through a preprocessor such as bash into command-line flags (rendering the tests subject to expansion rules)
Specifies behavioral context for a shared runtime (making the tests depend on that runtime's release schedule)

Stress test

In order to safely operate a system, SREs need to understand the limits of both the system and its components. In many cases, individual components don't gracefully degrade beyond a certain point-instead, they catastrophically fail. Engineers use stress tests to find the limits on a web service. Stress tests answer questions such as:
How full can a database get before writes start to fail?
How many queries a second can be sent to an application server before it becomes overloaded, causing requests to fail?

Canary test

The canary test is conspicuously absent from this list of production tests. The term canary comes from the phrase "canary in a coal mine," and refers to the practice of using a live bird to detect toxic gases before humans were poisoned.
To conduct a canary test, a subset of servers is upgraded to a new version or

configuration and then left in an incubation period. Should no unexpected variances occur, the release continues and the rest of the servers are upgraded in a progressive fashion.89 Should anything go awry, the modified servers can be quickly reverted to a known good state. We commonly refer to the incubation
period for the upgraded servers as "baking the binary."

A canary test isn't really a test; rather, it's structured user acceptance. Whereas configuration and stress tests confirm the existence of a specific condition over deterministic software, a canary test is more ad hoc. It only exposes the code under test to less predictable live production traffic, and thus, it isn't perfect and doesn't always catch newly introduced faults.
To provide a concrete example of how a canary might proceed: consider a given underlying fault that relatively rarely impacts user traffic and is being deployed with an upgrade rollout that is exponential. We expect a growing cumulative number of reported variances CU = RK where R is the rate of those reports, U is the order of the fault (defined later), and K is the period over which the traffic
grows by a factor of e, or 172%.90
In order to avoid user impact, a rollout that triggers undesirable variances needs to be quickly rolled back to the prior configuration. In the short time it takes automation to observe the variances and respond, it is likely that several additional reports will be generated. Once the dust has settled, these reports can estimate both the cumulative number C and rate R.
Dividing and correcting for K gives an estimate of U, the order of the underlying fault.91 Some examples:
U=1: The user's request encountered code that is simply broken.
U=2: This user's request randomly damages data that a future user's request may see.
U=3: The randomly damaged data is also a valid identifier to a previous request.
Most bugs are of order one: they scale linearly with the amount of user traffic [Per07]. You can generally track down these bugs by converting logs of all requests with unusual responses into new regression tests. This strategy doesn't work for higher-order bugs; a request that repeatedly fails if all the preceding requests are attempted in order will suddenly pass if some requests are omitted.

It is important to catch these higher-order bugs during release, because otherwise, operational workload can increase very quickly.
Keeping the dynamics of higher- versus lower-order bugs in mind, when you are using an exponential rollout strategy, it isn't necessary to attempt to achieve fairness among fractions of user traffic. As long as each method for establishing a fraction uses the same K interval, the estimate of U will be valid even though you can't yet determine which method was instrumental in illuminating the fault. Using many methods sequentially while permitting some overlap keeps the value of K small. This strategy minimizes the total number of user-visible variances C while still allowing an early estimate of U (hoping for 1, of course).

Creating a Test and Build Environment
While it's wonderful to think about these types of tests and failure scenarios on day one of a project, frequently SREs join a developer team when a project is already well underway-once the team's project validates its research model, its library proves that the project's underlying algorithm is scalable, or perhaps when all of the user interface mocks are finally acceptable. The team's codebase is still a prototype and comprehensive testing hasn't yet been designed or deployed. In such situations, where should your testing efforts begin? Conducting unit tests for every key function and class is a completely overwhelming prospect if the current test coverage is low or nonexistent. Instead, start with testing that delivers the most impact with the least effort.
You can start your approach by asking the following questions:

Can you prioritize the codebase in any way? To borrow a technique from feature development and project management, if every task is high priority, none of the tasks are high priority. Can you stack-rank the components of the system you're testing by any measure of importance?
Are there particular functions or classes that are absolutely mission-critical or business-critical? For example, code that involves billing is a commonly business-critical. Billing code is also frequently cleanly separable from other parts of the system.
Which APIs are other teams integrating against? Even the kind of breakage that never makes it past release testing to a user can be extremely harmful if it confuses another developer team, causing them to write wrong (or even just suboptimal) clients for your API.

Shipping software that is obviously broken is among the most cardinal sins of a developer. It takes little effort to create a series of smoke tests to run for every release. This type of low-effort, high-impact first step can lead to highly tested, reliable software.

One way to establish a strong testing culture92 is to start documenting all reported bugs as test cases. If every bug is converted into a test, each test is supposed to initially fail because the bug hasn't yet been fixed. As engineers fix the bugs, the software passes testing and you're on the road to developing a comprehensive regression test suite.
Another key task for creating well-tested software is to set up a testing infrastructure. The foundation for a strong testing infrastructure is a versioned source control system that tracks every change to the codebase.
Once source control is in place, you can add a continuous build system that builds the software and runs tests every time code is submitted. We've found it optimal if the build system notifies engineers the moment a change breaks a software project. At the risk of sounding obvious, it's essential that the latest version of a software project in source control is working completely. When the build system notifies engineers about broken code, they should drop all of their other tasks and prioritize fixing the problem. It is appropriate to treat defects this seriously for a few reasons:
It's usually harder to fix what's broken if there are changes to the codebase after the defect is introduced.
Broken software slows down the team because they must work around the breakage.
Release cadences, such as nightly and weekly builds, lose their value.
The ability of the team to respond to a request for an emergency release (for example, in response to a security vulnerability disclosure) becomes much more complex and difficult.
The concepts of stability and agility are traditionally in tension in the world of SRE. The last bullet point provides an interesting case where stability actually drives agility. When the build is predictably solid and reliable, developers can iterate faster!

Some build systems like Bazel93 have valuable features that afford more precise

control over testing. For example, Bazel creates dependency graphs for software projects. When a change is made to a file, Bazel only rebuilds the part of the software that depends on that file. Such systems provide reproducible builds. Instead of running all tests at every submit, tests only run for changed code. As a result, tests execute cheaper and faster.
There are a variety of tools to help you quantify and visualize the level of test coverage you need [Cra10]. Use these tools to shape the focus of your testing: approach the prospect of creating highly tested code as an engineering project rather than a philosophical mental exercise. Instead of repeating the ambiguous refrain "We need more tests," set explicit goals and deadlines.
Remember that not all software is created equal. Life-critical or revenue-critical systems demand substantially higher levels of test quality and coverage than a non-production script with a short shelf life.

Testing at Scale
Now that we've covered the fundamentals of testing, let's examine how SRE takes a systems perspective to testing in order to drive reliability at scale.
A small unit test might have a short list of dependencies: one source file, the testing library, the runtime libraries, the compiler, and the local hardware running the tests. A robust testing environment dictates that those dependencies each have their own test coverage, with tests that specifically address use cases that other parts of the environment expect. If the implementation of that unit test depends on a code path inside a runtime library that doesn't have test coverage,
an unrelated change in the environment94 can lead the unit test to consistently pass testing, regardless of faults in the code under test.
In contrast, a release test might depend on so many parts that it has a transitive dependency on every object in the code repository. If the test depends on a clean copy of the production environment, in principle, every small patch requires performing a full disaster recovery iteration. Practical testing environments try to select branch points among the versions and merges. Doing so resolves the maximum amount of dependent uncertainty for the minimum number of iterations. Of course, when an area of uncertainty resolves into a fault, you need to select additional branch points.

Testing Scalable Tools

As pieces of software, SRE tools also need testing.95 SRE-developed tools might perform tasks such as the following:
Retrieving and propagating database performance metrics Predicting usage metrics to plan for capacity risks
Refactoring data within a service replica that isn't user accessible Changing files on a server
SRE tools share two characteristics:

Their side effects remain within the tested mainstream API
They're isolated from user-facing production by an existing validation and release barrier

Barrier Defenses Against Risky Software


Software that bypasses the usual heavily tested API (even if it does so for a good cause) could wreak havoc on a live service. For example, a database engine implementation might allow administrators to temporarily turn off transactions in order to shorten maintenance windows. If the implementation is used by batch update software, user-facing isolation may be lost if that utility is ever accidentally launched against a user-facing replica. Avoid this risk of havoc with design:
1. Use a separate tool to place a barrier in the replication configuration so that the replica cannot pass its health check. As a result, the replica isn't released to users.
2. Configure the risky software to check for the barrier upon startup. Allow the risky software to only access unhealthy replicas.
3. Use the replica health validating tool you use for black-box monitoring to remove the barrier.
Automation tools are also software. Because their risk footprint appears out-of- band for a different layer of the service, their testing needs are more subtle. Automation tools perform tasks like the following:
Database index selection

Load balancing between datacenters Shuffling relay logs for fast remastering
Automation tools share two characteristics:

The actual operation performed is against a robust, predictable, and well- tested API
The purpose of the operation is the side effect that is an invisible discontinuity to another API client
Testing can demonstrate the desired behavior of the other service layer, both before and after the change. It's often possible to test whether internal state, as seen through the API, is constant across the operation. For example, databases pursue correct answers, even if a suitable index isn't available for the query. On the other hand, some documented API invariants (such as a DNS cache holding until the TTL) may not hold across the operation. For example, if a runlevel change replaces a local nameserver with a caching proxy, both choices can promise to retain completed lookups for many seconds. It's unlikely that the cache state is handed over from one to the other.
Given that automation tools imply additional release tests for other binaries to handle environmental transients, how do you define the environment in which those automation tools run? After all, the automation for shuffling containers to improve usage is likely to try to shuffle itself at some point if it also runs in a container. It would be embarrassing if a new release of its internal algorithm yielded dirty memory pages so quickly that the network bandwidth of the associated mirroring ended up preventing the code from finalizing the live migration. Even if there's an integration test for which the binary intentionally shuffles itself around, the test likely doesn't use a production-sized model of the container fleet. It almost certainly isn't allowed to use scarce high-latency intercontinental bandwidth for testing such races.
Even more amusingly, one automation tool might be changing the environment in which another automation tool runs. Or both tools might be changing the environment of the other automation tool simultaneously! For example, a fleet upgrading tool likely consumes the most resources when it's pushing upgrades. As a result, the container rebalancing would be tempted to move the tool. In turn, the container rebalancing tool occasionally needs upgrading. This circular dependency is fine if the associated APIs have restart semantics, someone

remembered to implement test coverage for those semantics, and checkpoint health is assured independently.

Testing Disaster

Many disaster recovery tools can be carefully designed to operate offline. Such tools do the following:
Compute a checkpoint state that is equivalent to cleanly stopping the service
Push the checkpoint state to be loadable by existing nondisaster validation tools
Support the usual release barrier tools, which trigger the clean start
procedure

In many cases, you can implement these phases so that the associated tests are easy to write and offer excellent coverage. If any of the constraints (offline, checkpoint, loadable, barrier, or clean start) must be broken, it's much harder to show confidence that the associated tool implementation will work at any time on short notice.
Online repair tools inherently operate outside the mainstream API and therefore become more interesting to test. One challenge you face in a distributed system is determining if normal behavior, which may be eventually consistent by nature, will interact badly with the repair. For example, consider a race condition that you can attempt to analyze using the offline tools. An offline tool is generally written to expect instant consistency, as opposed to eventual consistency, because instant consistency is less challenging to test. This situation becomes complicated because the repair binary is generally built separately from the serving production binary that it's racing against. Consequently, you might need to build a unified instrumented binary to run within these tests so that the tools can observe transactions.

Using Statistical Tests


Statistical techniques, such as Lemon [Ana07] for fuzzing, and Chaos Monkey96 and Jepsen97 for distributed state, aren't necessarily repeatable tests. Simply rerunning such tests after a code change doesn't definitively prove that the observed fault is fixed.98 However, these techniques can be useful:

They can provide a log of all the randomly selected actions that are taken in a given run-sometimes simply by logging the random number generator seed.
If this log is immediately refactored as a release test, running it a few times before starting on the bug report is often helpful. The rate of nonfailure on replay tells you how hard it will be to later assert that the fault is fixed.
Variations in how the fault is expressed help you pinpoint suspicious areas in the code.
Some of those later runs may demonstrate failure situations that are more severe than those in the original run. In response, you may want to escalate the bug's severity and impact.

The Need for Speed

For every version (patch) in the code repository, every defined test provides a pass or fail indication. That indication may change for repeated and seemingly identical runs. You can estimate the actual likelihood of a test passing or failing by averaging over those many runs and computing the statistical uncertainty of that likelihood. However, performing this calculation for every test at every version point is computationally infeasible.
Instead, you must form hypotheses about the many scenarios of interest and run the appropriate number of repeats of each test and version to allow a reasonable inference. Some of these scenarios are benign (in a code quality sense), while others are actionable. These scenarios affect all the test attempts to varying extents and, because they are coupled, reliably and quickly obtaining a list of actionable hypotheses (i.e., components that are actually broken) means estimating all scenarios at the same time.
Engineers who use the testing infrastructure want to know if their code-usually a tiny fraction of all the source behind a given test run-is broken. Often, not being broken implies that any observed failures can be blamed on someone else's code. In other words, the engineer wants to know if their code has an unanticipated race condition that makes the test flaky (or more flaky than the test already was due to other factors).

Testing Deadlines


Most tests are simple, in the sense that they run as a self-contained hermetic

binary that fits in a small compute container for a few seconds. These tests give engineers interactive feedback about mistakes before the engineer switches context to the next bug or task.
Tests that require orchestration across many binaries and/or across a fleet that has many containers tend to have startup times measured in seconds. Such tests are usually unable to offer interactive feedback, so they can be classified as batch tests. Instead of saying "don't close the editor tab" to the engineer, these test failures are saying "this code is not ready for review" to the code reviewer.
The informal deadline for the test is the point at which the engineer makes the next context switch. Test results are best given to the engineer before he or she switches context, because otherwise the next context may involve XKCD compiling.99
Suppose an engineer is working on a service with over 21,000 simple tests and occasionally proposes a patch against the service's codebase. To test the patch, you want to compare the vector of pass/fail results from the codebase before the patch with the vector of results from the codebase after the patch. A favorable comparison of those two vectors provisionally qualifies the codebase as releasable. This qualification creates an incentive to run the many release and integration tests, as well as other distributed binary tests that examine scaling of the system (in case the patch uses significantly more local compute resources) and complexity (in case the patch creates a superlinear workload elsewhere).
At what rate can you incorrectly flag a user's patch as damaging by miscalculating environmental flakiness? It seems likely that users would vehemently complain if 1 in 10 patches is rejected. But a rejection of 1 patch among 100 perfect patches might go without comment.
This means you're interested in the 42,000th root (one for each defined test before the patch, and one for each defined test after the patch) of 0.99 (the fraction of patches that are accepted). This calculation:

suggests that those individual tests must run correctly over 99.9999% of the time. Hmm.

Pushing to Production

While production configuration management is commonly kept in a source control repository, configuration is often separate from the developer source code. Similarly, the software testing infrastructure often can't see production configuration. Even if the two are located in the same repository, changes for configuration management are made in branches and/or a segregated directory tree that test automation has historically ignored.
In a legacy corporate environment where software engineers develop binaries and throw them over the wall to the administrators who update the servers, segregation of testing infrastructure and production configuration is at best annoying, and at worst can damage reliability and agility. Such segregation might also lead to tool duplication. In a nominally integrated Ops environment, this segregation degrades resiliency because it creates subtle inconsistencies between the behavior for the two sets of tools. This segregation also limits project velocity because of commit races between the versioning systems.
In the SRE model, the impact of segregating testing infrastructure from production configuration is appreciably worse, as it prevents relating the model describing production to the model describing the application behavior. This discrepancy impacts engineers who want to find statistical inconsistencies in expectations at development time. However, this segregation doesn't slow down development so much as prevent the system architecture from changing, because there is no way to eliminate migration risk.
Consider a scenario of unified versioning and unified testing, so that the SRE methodology is applicable. What impact would the failure of a distributed architecture migration have? A fair amount of testing will probably occur. So far, it's assumed that a software engineer would likely accept the test system giving the wrong answer 1 time in 10 or so. What risk are you willing to take with the migration if you know that testing may return a false negative and the situation could become really exciting, really quickly? Clearly, some areas of test coverage need a higher level of paranoia than others. This distinction can be generalized: some test failures are indicative of a larger impact risk than other test failures.

Expect Testing Fail

Not too long ago, a software product might have released once per year. Its

binaries were generated by a compiler toolchain over many hours or days, and most of the testing was performed by humans against manually written instructions. This release process was inefficient, but there was little need to automate it. The release effort was dominated by documentation, data migration, user retraining, and other factors. Mean Time Between Failure (MTBF) for those releases was one year, no matter how much testing took place. So many changes happened per release that some user-visible breakage was bound to be hiding in the software. Effectively, the reliability data from the previous release was irrelevant for the next release.
Effective API/ABI management tools and interpreted languages that scale to large amounts of code now support building and executing a new software version every few minutes. In principle, a sufficiently large army of humans100 could complete testing on each new version using the methods described earlier
and achieve the same quality bar for each incremental version. Even though ultimately only the same tests are applied to the same code, that final software version has higher quality in the resulting release that ships annually. This is because in addition to the annual versions, the intermediate versions of the code are also being tested. Using intermediates, you can unambiguously map problems found during testing back to their underlying causes and be confident that the whole issue, and not just the limited symptom that was exposed, is fixed. This principle of a shorter feedback cycle is equally effective when applied to automated test coverage.
If you let users try more versions of the software during the year, the MTBF suffers because there are more opportunities for user-visible breakage. However, you can also discover areas that would benefit from additional test coverage. If these tests are implemented, each improvement protects against some future failure. Careful reliability management combines the limits on uncertainty due to test coverage with the limits on user-visible faults in order to adjust the release cadence. This combination maximizes the knowledge that you gain from operations and end users. These gains drive test coverage and, in turn, product release velocity.
If an SRE modifies a configuration file or adjusts an automation tool's strategy (as opposed to implementing a user feature), the engineering work matches the same conceptual model. When you are defining a release cadence based on reliability, it often makes sense to segment the reliability budget by functionality, or (more conveniently) by team. In such a scenario, the feature

engineering team aims to achieve a given uncertainty limit that affects their goal release cadence. The SRE team has a separate budget with its own associated uncertainty, and thus an upper limit on their release rate.
In order to remain reliable and to avoid scaling the number of SREs supporting a service linearly, the production environment has to run mostly unattended. To remain unattended, the environment must be resilient against minor faults. When a major event that demands manual SRE intervention occurs, the tools used by SRE must be suitably tested. Otherwise, that intervention decreases confidence that historical data is applicable to the near future. The reduction in confidence requires waiting for an analysis of monitoring data in order to eliminate the uncertainty incurred. Whereas the previous discussion in Testing Scalable Tools focused on how to meet the opportunity of test coverage for an SRE tool, here you see that testing determines how often it is appropriate to use that tool against production.
Configuration files generally exist because changing the configuration is faster than rebuilding a tool. This low latency is often a factor in keeping MTTR low. However, these same files are also changed frequently for reasons that don't need that reduced latency. When viewed from the point of view of reliability:
A configuration file that exists to keep MTTR low, and is only modified when there's a failure, has a release cadence slower than the MTBF. There can be a fair amount of uncertainty as to whether a given manual edit is actually truly optimal without the edit impacting the overall site reliability. A	configuration	file	that	changes	more	than	once	per	user-facing application release (for example, because it holds release state) can be a major risk if these changes are not treated the same as application releases. If testing and monitoring coverage of that configuration file is not considerably better than that of the user application, that file will dominate site reliability in a negative way.
One method of handling configuration files is to make sure that every configuration file is categorized under only one of the options in the preceding bulleted list, and to somehow enforce that rule. Should you take the latter strategy, make sure of the following:
Each configuration file has enough test coverage to support regular routine editing.

Before releases, file edits are somewhat delayed while waiting for release testing.
Provide a break-glass mechanism to push the file live before completing the testing. Since breaking the glass impairs reliability, it's generally a good idea to make the break noisy by (for example) filing a bug requesting a more robust resolution for next time.

Break-Glass and Testing


You can implement a break-glass mechanism to disable release testing. Doing so means that whoever makes a hurried manual edit isn't told about any mistakes until the real user impact is reported by monitoring. It's better to leave the tests running, associate the early push event with the pending testing event, and (as soon as possible) back-annotate the push with any broken tests. This way, a flawed manual push can be quickly followed by another (hopefully less flawed) manual push. Ideally, that break-glass mechanism automatically boosts the priority of those release tests so that they can preempt the routine incremental validation and coverage workload that the test infrastructure is already processing.

Integration

In addition to unit testing a configuration file to mitigate its risk to reliability, it's also important to consider integration testing configuration files. The contents of the configuration file are (for testing purposes) potentially hostile content to the interpreter reading the configuration. Interpreted languages such as Python are commonly used for configuration files because their interpreters can be embedded, and some simple sandboxing is available to protect against nonmalicious coding errors.
Writing your configuration files in an interpreted language is risky, as this approach is fraught with latent failures that are hard to definitively address. Because loading content actually consists of executing a program, there's no inherent upper limit on how inefficient loading can be. In addition to any other testing, you should pair this type of integration testing with careful deadline checking on all integration test methods in order to label tests that do not run to completion in a reasonable amount of time as failed.
If the configuration is instead written as text in a custom syntax, every category

of test needs separate coverage from scratch. Using an existing syntax such as YAML in combination with a heavily tested parser like Python's safe_load removes some of the toil incurred by the configuration file. Careful choice of syntax and parser can ensure there's a hard upper limit on how long the loading operation can take. However, the implementer needs to address schema faults, and most simple strategies for doing so don't have an upper bound on runtime. Even worse, these strategies tend not to be robustly unit tested.

The benefit of using protocol buffers101 is that the schema is defined in advance and automatically checked at load time, removing even more of the toil, yet still offering the bounded runtime.

The role of SRE generally includes writing systems engineering tools102 (if no one else is already writing them) and adding robust validation with test coverage. All tools can behave unexpectedly due to bugs not caught by testing, so defense in depth is advisable. When one tool behaves unexpectedly, engineers need to be as confident as possible that most of their other tools are working correctly and can therefore mitigate or resolve the side effects of that misbehavior. A key element of delivering site reliability is finding each anticipated form of misbehavior and making sure that some test (or another tool's tested input validator) reports that misbehavior. The tool that finds the problem might not be able to fix or even stop it, but should at least report the problem before a catastrophic outage occurs.
For example, consider the configured list of all users (such as /etc/passwd on a non-networked Unix-style machine) and imagine an edit that unintentionally causes the parser to stop after parsing only half of the file. Because recently created users haven't loaded, the machine will most likely continue to run without problem, and many users may not notice the fault. The tool that maintains home directories can easily notice the mismatch between the actual directories present and those implied by the (partial) user list and urgently report the discrepancy. This tool's value lies in reporting the problem, and it should avoid attempting to remediate on its own (by deleting lots of user data).

Production Probes

Given that testing specifies acceptable behavior in the face of known data, while monitoring confirms acceptable behavior in the face of unknown user data, it would seem that major sources of risk-both the known and the unknown-are

covered by the combination of testing and monitoring. Unfortunately, actual risk is more complicated.
Known good requests should work, while known bad requests should error. Implementing both kinds of coverage as an integration test is generally a good idea. You can replay the same bank of test requests as a release test. Splitting the known good requests into those that can be replayed against production and those that can't yields three sets of requests:
Known bad requests
Known good requests that can be replayed against production Known good requests that can't be replayed against production
You can use each set as both integration and release tests. Most of these tests can also be used as monitoring probes.
It would seem to be superfluous and, in principle, pointless to deploy such monitoring because these exact same requests have already been tried two other ways. However, those two ways were different for a few reasons:
The release test probably wrapped the integrated server with a frontend and a fake backend.
The probe test probably wrapped the release binary with a load balancing frontend and a separate scalable persistent backend.
Frontends and backends probably have independent release cycles. It's likely that the schedules for those cycles occur at different rates (due to their adaptive release cadences).
Therefore, the monitoring probe running in production is a configuration that wasn't previously tested.
Those probes should never fail, but what does it mean if they do fail? Either the frontend API (from the load balancer) or the backend API (to the persistent store) is not equivalent between the production and release environments. Unless you already know why the production and release environments aren't equivalent, the site is likely broken.
The same production updater that gradually replaces the application also gradually replaces the probes so that all four combinations of old-or-new probes sending requests to old-or-new applications are being continuously generated.

That updater can detect when one of the four combinations is generating errors and roll back to the last known good state. Usually, the updater expects each newly started application instance to be unhealthy for a short time as it prepares to start receiving lots of user traffic. If the probes are already inspected as part of the readiness check, the update safely fails indefinitely, and no user traffic is ever routed to the new version. The update remains paused until engineers have time and inclination to diagnose the fault condition and then encourage the production updater to cleanly roll back.
This production test by probe does indeed offer protection to the site, plus clear feedback to the engineers. The earlier that feedback is given to engineers, the more useful it is. It's also preferable that the test is automated so that the delivery of warnings to engineers is scalable.
Assume that each component has the older software version that's being replaced and the newer version that's rolling out (now or very soon). The newer version might be talking to the old version's peer, which forces it to use the deprecated API. Or the older version might be talking to a peer's newer version, using the API which (at the time the older version was released) didn't work properly yet. But it works now, honest! You'd better hope those tests for future compatibility (which are running as monitoring probes) had good API coverage.

Fake Backend Versions


When implementing release tests, the fake backend is often maintained by the peer service's engineering team and merely referenced as a build dependency. The hermetic test that is executed by the testing infrastructure always combines the fake backend and the test frontend at the same build point in the revision control history.
That build dependency may be providing a runnable hermetic binary and, ideally, the engineering team maintaining it cuts a release of that fake backend binary at the same time they cut their main backend application and their probes. If that backend release is available, it might be worthwhile to include hermetic frontend release tests (without the fake backend binary) in the frontend release package.
Your monitoring should be aware of all release versions on both sides of a given service interface between two peers. This setup ensures that retrieving every

combination of the two releases and determining whether the test still passes doesn't take much extra configuration. This monitoring doesn't have to happen continuously-you only need to run new combinations that are the result of either team cutting a new release. Such problems don't have to block that new release itself.
On the other hand, rollout automation should ideally block the associated production rollout until the problematic combinations are no longer possible. Similarly, the peer team's automation may consider draining (and upgrading) the replicas that haven't yet moved from a problematic combination.

Conclusion
Testing is one of the most profitable investments engineers can make to improve the reliability of their product. Testing isn't an activity that happens once or twice in the lifecycle of a project; it's continuous. The amount of effort required to write good tests is substantial, as is the effort to build and maintain infrastructure that promotes a strong testing culture. You can't fix a problem until you understand it, and in engineering, you can only understand a problem by measuring it. The methodologies and techniques in this chapter provide a solid foundation for measuring faults and uncertainty in a software system, and help engineers reason about the reliability of software as it's written and released to users.

86This chapter explains how to maximize the value derived from investing engineering effort into testing. Once an engineer defines suitable tests (for a given system) in a generalized way, the remaining work is common across all SRE teams and thus may be considered shared infrastructure. That infrastructure consists of a scheduler (to share budgeted resources across otherwise unrelated projects) and executors (that sandbox test binaries to prevent them from being considered trusted). These two infrastructure components can each be considered an ordinary SRE-supported service (much like cluster scale storage), and therefore won't be discussed further here.

87For	further	reading	on	equivalence,	see http://stackoverflow.com/questions/1909280/equivalence-class-testing-vs- boundary-value-testing.

88See https://google.github.io/dagger/.
89A standard rule of thumb is to start by having the release impact 0.1% of user traffic, and then scaling by orders of magnitude every 24 hours while varying the geographic location of servers being upgraded (then on day 2: 1%, day 3: 10%, day 4: 100%).

90For instance, assuming a 24 hour interval of continuous exponential growth between 1% and 10%,  seconds, or about 10 hours and 25 minutes.

91We're using order here in the sense of "big O notation" order of complexity. For more context, see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_O_notation.

92For more on this topic, we highly recommend [Bla14] by our former coworker and ex-Googler, Mike Bland.

93See https://github.com/google/bazel.
94For example, code under test that wraps a nontrivial API to provide a simpler and backward-compatible abstraction. The API that used to be synchronous instead returns a future. Calling argument errors still deliver an exception, but not until the future is evaluated. The code under test passes the API result directly back to the caller. Many cases of argument misuse may not be caught.

95This section talks specifically about tools used by SRE that need to be scalable. However, SRE also develops and uses tools that don't necessarily need to be scalable. The tools that don't need to be scalable also need to be tested, but these tools are out of scope for this section, and therefore won't be discussed here. Because their risk footprint is similar to user-facing applications, similar testing strategies are applicable on such SRE-developed tools.

96See https://github.com/Netflix/SimianArmy/wiki/Chaos-Monkey.
97See https://github.com/aphyr/jepsen.
98Even if the test run is repeated with the same random seed so that the task kills are in the same order, there is no serialization between the kills and the fake user

traffic. Therefore, there's no guarantee that the actual previously observed code path will now be exercised again.

99See http://xkcd.com/303/.
100Perhaps acquired through Mechanical Turk or similar services.
101See https://github.com/google/protobuf.
102Not because software engineers shouldn't write them. Tools that cross between technology verticals and span abstraction layers tend to have weak associations with many software teams and a slightly stronger association with systems teams.

Chapter 18 - Software Engineering in SRE
Written by Dave Helstroom and Trisha Weir with Evan Leonard and Kurt Delimon
Edited by Kavita Guliani

Ask someone to name a Google software engineering effort and they'll likely list a consumer-facing product like Gmail or Maps; some might even mention underlying infrastructure such as Bigtable or Colossus. But in truth, there is a massive amount of behind-the-scenes software engineering that consumers never see. A number of those products are developed within SRE.
Google's production environment is-by some measures-one of the most complex machines humanity has ever built. SREs have firsthand experience with the intricacies of production, making them uniquely well suited to develop the appropriate tools to solve internal problems and use cases related to keeping production running. The majority of these tools are related to the overall directive of maintaining uptime and keeping latency low, but take many forms: examples include binary rollout mechanisms, monitoring, or a development environment built on dynamic server composition. Overall, these SRE- developed tools are full-fledged software engineering projects, distinct from one- off solutions and quick hacks, and the SREs who develop them have adopted a product-based mindset that takes both internal customers and a roadmap for future plans into account.

Why Is Software Engineering Within SRE Important?
In many ways, the vast scale of Google production has necessitated internal software development, because few third-party tools are designed at sufficient scale for Google's needs. The company's history of successful software projects has led us to appreciate the benefits of developing directly within SRE.
SREs are in a unique position to effectively develop internal software for a

number of reasons:

The breadth and depth of Google-specific production knowledge within the SRE organization allows its engineers to design and create software with the appropriate considerations for dimensions such as scalability, graceful degradation during failure, and the ability to easily interface with other infrastructure or tools.
Because SREs are embedded in the subject matter, they easily understand the needs and requirements of the tool being developed.
A direct relationship with the intended user-fellow SREs-results in frank and high-signal user feedback. Releasing a tool to an internal audience with high familiarity with the problem space means that a development team can launch and iterate more quickly. Internal users are typically more understanding when it comes to minimal UI and other alpha product issues.
From a purely pragmatic standpoint, Google clearly benefits from having engineers with SRE experience developing software. By deliberate design, the growth rate of SRE-supported services exceeds the growth rate of the SRE organization; one of SRE's guiding principles is that "team size should not scale directly with service growth." Achieving linear team growth in the face of exponential service growth requires perpetual automation work and efforts to streamline tools, processes, and other aspects of a service that introduce inefficiency into the day-to-day operation of production. Having the people with direct experience running production systems developing the tools that will ultimately contribute to uptime and latency goals makes a lot of sense.
On the flip side, individual SREs, as well as the broader SRE organization, also benefit from SRE-driven software development.
Fully fledged software development projects within SRE provide career development opportunities for SREs, as well as an outlet for engineers who don't want their coding skills to get rusty. Long-term project work provides much-needed balance to interrupts and on-call work, and can provide job satisfaction for engineers who want their careers to maintain a balance between software engineering and systems engineering.
Beyond the design of automation tools and other efforts to reduce the workload for engineers in SRE, software development projects can further benefit the SRE organization by attracting and helping to retain engineers with a broad variety of

skills. The desirability of team diversity is doubly true for SRE, where a variety of backgrounds and problem-solving approaches can help prevent blind spots. To this end, Google always strives to staff its SRE teams with a mix of engineers with traditional software development experience and engineers with systems engineering experience.

Auxon Case Study: Project Background and Problem Space
This case study examines Auxon, a powerful tool developed within SRE to automate capacity planning for services running in Google production. To best understand how Auxon was conceived and the problems it addresses, we'll first examine the problem space associated with capacity planning, and the difficulties that traditional approaches to this task present for services at Google and across the industry as a whole. For more context on how Google uses the terms service and cluster, see The Production Environment at Google, from the Viewpoint of an SRE.

Traditional Capacity Planning

There are myriad tactics for capacity planning of compute resources (see [Hix15a]), but the majority of these approaches boil down to a cycle that can be approximated as follows:
1) Collect demand forecasts.

How many resources are needed? When and where are these resources needed?
Uses the best data we have available today to plan into the future Typically covers anywhere from several quarters to years
2) Devise build and allocation plans.

Given this forecasted outlook, what's the best way to meet this demand with additional supply of resources? How much supply, and in what locations?
3) Review and sign off on plan.

Is the forecast reasonable? Does the plan line up with budgetary, product- level, and technical considerations?
4) Deploy and configure resources.

Once resources eventually arrive (potentially in phases over the course of some defined period of time), which services get to use the resources? How do I make typically lower-level resources (CPU, disk, etc.) useful for services?
It bears stressing that capacity planning is a neverending cycle: assumptions change, deployments slip, and budgets are cut, resulting in revision upon revision of The Plan. And each revision has trickle-down effects that must propagate throughout the plans of all subsequent quarters. For example, a shortfall this quarter must be made up in future quarters. Traditional capacity planning uses demand as a key driver, and manually shapes supply to fit demand in response to each change.

Brittle by nature

Traditional capacity planning produces a resource allocation plan that can be disrupted by any seemingly minor change. For example:
A service undergoes a decrease in efficiency, and needs more resources than expected to serve the same demand.
Customer adoption rates increase, resulting in an increase in projected demand.
The delivery date for a new cluster of compute resources slips.
A product decision about a performance goal changes the shape of the required service deployment (the service's footprint) and the amount of required resources.
Minor changes require cross-checking the entire allocation plan to make sure that the plan is still feasible; larger changes (such as delayed resource delivery or product strategy changes) potentially require re-creating the plan from scratch. A delivery slippage in a single cluster might impact the redundancy or latency requirements of multiple services: resource allocations in other clusters must be increased to make up for the slippage, and these and any other changes would have to propagate throughout the plan.

Also, consider that the capacity plan for any given quarter (or other time frame) is based on the expected outcome of the capacity plans of previous quarters, meaning that a change in any one quarter results in work to update subsequent quarters.

Laborious and imprecise

For many teams, the process of collecting the data necessary to generate demand forecasts is slow and error-prone. And when it is time to find capacity to meet this future demand, not all resources are equally suitable. For example, if latency requirements mean that a service must commit to serve user demand on the same continent as the user, obtaining additional resources in North America won't alleviate a capacity shortfall in Asia. Every forecast has constraints, or parameters around how it can be fulfilled; constraints are fundamentally related to intent, which is discussed in the next section.
Mapping constrained resource requests into allocations of actual resources from the available capacity is equally slow: it's both complex and tedious to bin pack requests into limited space by hand, or to find solutions that fit a limited budget.
This process may already paint a grim picture, but to make matters worse, the tools it requires are typically unreliable or cumbersome. Spreadsheets suffer severely from scalability problems and have limited error-checking abilities. Data becomes stale, and tracking changes becomes difficult. Teams often are forced to make simplifying assumptions and reduce the complexity of their requirements, simply to render maintaining adequate capacity a tractable problem.
When service owners face the challenges of fitting a series of requests for capacity from various services into the resources available to them, in a manner that meets the various constraints a service may have, additional imprecision ensues. Bin packing is an NP-hard problem that is difficult for human beings to compute by hand. Furthermore, the capacity request from a service is generally an inflexible set of demand requirements: X cores in cluster Y. The reasons why X cores or Y cluster are needed, and any degrees of freedom around those parameters, are long lost by the time the request reaches a human trying to fit a list of demands into available supply.
The net result is a massive expenditure of human effort to come up with a bin

packing that is approximate, at best. The process is brittle to change, and there are no known bounds on an optimal solution.

Our Solution: Intent-Based Capacity Planning

Specify the requirements, not the implementation.

At Google, many teams have moved to an approach we call Intent-based Capacity Planning. The basic premise of this approach is to programmatically encode the dependencies and parameters (intent) of a service's needs, and use that encoding to autogenerate an allocation plan that details which resources go to which service, in which cluster. If demand, supply, or service requirements change, we can simply autogenerate a new plan in response to the changed parameters, which is now the new best distribution of resources.
With a service's true requirements and flexibility captured, the capacity plan is now dramatically more nimble in the face of change, and we can reach an optimal solution that meets as many parameters as possible. With bin packing delegated to computers, human toil is drastically reduced, and service owners can focus on high-order priorities like SLOs, production dependencies, and service infrastructure requirements, as opposed to low-level scrounging for resources.
As an added benefit, using computational optimization to map from intent to implementation achieves much greater precision, ultimately resulting in cost savings to the organization. Bin packing is still far from a solved problem, because certain types are still considered NP-hard; however, today's algorithms can solve to a known optimal solution.

Intent-Based Capacity Planning
Intent is the rationale for how a service owner wants to run their service. Moving from concrete resource demands to motivating reasons in order to arrive at the true capacity planning intent often requires several layers of abstraction. Consider the following chain of abstraction:
1) "I want 50 cores in clusters X, Y, and Z for service Foo."

This is an explicit resource request. But...why do we need this many

resources specifically in these particular clusters?

2) "I want a 50-core footprint in any 3 clusters in geographic region YYY for service Foo."
This request introduces more degrees of freedom and is potentially easier to fulfill, although it doesn't explain the reasoning behind its requirements. But...why do we need this quantity of resources, and why 3 footprints?
3) "I want to meet service Foo's demand in each geographic region, and have N
+ 2 redundancy."

Suddenly greater flexibility is introduced and we can understand at a more "human" level what happens if service Foo does not receive these resources. But...why do we need N + 2 for service Foo?
4) "I want to run service Foo at 5 nines of reliability."

This is a more abstract requirement, and the ramification if the requirement isn't met becomes clear: reliability will suffer. And we have even greater flexibility here: perhaps running at N + 2 is not actually sufficient or optimal for this service, and some other deployment plan would be more suitable.
So what level of intent should be used by intent-driven capacity planning? Ideally, all levels of intent should be supported together, with services benefiting the more they shift to specifying intent versus implementation. In Google's experience, services tend to achieve the best wins as they cross to step 3: good degrees of flexibility are available, and the ramifications of this request are in higher-level and understandable terms. Particularly sophisticated services may aim for step 4.

Precursors to Intent

What information do we need in order to capture a service's intent? Enter dependencies, performance metrics, and prioritization.

Dependencies

Services at Google depend on many other infrastructure and user-facing services, and these dependencies heavily influence where a service can be placed. For example, imagine user-facing service Foo, which depends upon Bar, an infrastructure storage service. Foo expresses a requirement that Bar must be located within 30 milliseconds of network latency of Foo. This requirement has important repercussions for where we place both Foo and Bar, and intent-driven capacity planning must take these constraints into account.
Furthermore, production dependencies are nested: to build upon the preceding example, imagine service Bar has its own dependencies on Baz, a lower-level distributed storage service, and Qux, an application management service. Therefore, where we can now place Foo depends on where we can place Bar, Baz, and Qux. A given set of production dependencies can be shared, possibly with different stipulations around intent.

Performance metrics

Demand for one service trickles down to result in demand for one or more other services. Understanding the chain of dependencies helps formulate the general scope of the bin packing problem, but we still need more information about expected resource usage. How many compute resources does service Foo need to serve N user queries? For every N queries of service Foo, how many Mbps of data do we expect for service Bar?
Performance metrics are the glue between dependencies. They convert from one or more higher-level resource type(s) to one or more lower-level resource type(s). Deriving appropriate performance metrics for a service can involve load testing and resource usage monitoring.

Prioritization

Inevitably, resource constraints result in trade-offs and hard decisions: of the many requirements that all services have, which requirements should be sacrificed in the face of insufficient capacity?
Perhaps N + 2 redundancy for service Foo is more important than N + 1 redundancy for service Bar. Or perhaps the feature launch of X is less important than N + 0 redundancy for service Baz.

Intent-driven planning forces these decisions to be made transparently, openly, and consistently. Resource constraints entail the same trade-offs, but all too often, the prioritization can be ad hoc and opaque to service owners. Intent-based planning allows prioritization to be as granular or coarse as needed.

Introduction to Auxon

Auxon is Google's implementation of an intent-based capacity planning and resource allocation solution, and a prime example of an SRE-designed and developed software engineering product: it was built by a small group of software engineers and a technical program manager within SRE over the course of two years. Auxon is a perfect case study to demonstrate how software development can be fostered within SRE.
Auxon is actively used to plan the use of many millions of dollars of machine resources at Google. It has become a critical component of capacity planning for several major divisions within Google.
As a product, Auxon provides the means to collect intent-based descriptions of a service's resource requirements and dependencies. These user intents are expressed as requirements for how the owner would like the service to be provisioned. Requirements might be specified as a request like, "My service must be N + 2 per continent" or "The frontend servers must be no more than 50 ms away from the backend servers." Auxon collects this information either via a user configuration language or via a programmatic API, thus translating human intent into machine-parseable constraints. Requirements can be prioritized, a feature that's useful if resources are insufficient to meet all requirements, and therefore trade-offs must be made. These requirements-the intent-are ultimately represented internally as a giant mixed-integer or linear program. Auxon solves the linear program, and uses the resultant bin packing solution to formulate an allocation plan for resources.
Figure 18-1 and the explanations that follow it outline Auxon's major components.



Figure 18-1. The major components of Auxon

Performance Data describes how a service scales: for every unit of demand X in cluster Y, how many units of dependency Z are used? This scaling data may be derived in a number of ways depending on the maturity of the service in question. Some services are load tested, while others infer their scaling based upon past performance.
Per-Service Demand Forecast Data describes the usage trend for forecasted demand signals. Some services derive their future usage from demand forecasts
-a forecast of queries per second broken down by continent. Not all services have a demand forecast: some services (e.g., a storage service like Colossus) derive their demand purely from services that depend upon them.
Resource Supply provides data about the availability of base-level, fundamental resources: for example, the number of machines expected to be available for use at a particular point in the future. In linear program terminology, the resource supply acts as an upper bound that limits how services can grow and where services can be placed. Ultimately, we want to make the best use of this resource supply as the intent-based description of the combined group of services allows.
Resource Pricing provides data about how much base-level, fundamental resources cost. For instance, the cost of machines may vary globally based upon the space/power charges of a given facility. In linear program terminology, the

prices inform the overall calculated costs, which act as the objective that we want to minimize.
Intent Config is the key to how intent-based information is fed to Auxon. It defines what constitutes a service, and how services relate to one another. The config ultimately acts as a configuration layer that allows all the other components to be wired together. It's designed to be human-readable and configurable.
Auxon Configuration Language Engine acts based upon the information it receives from the Intent Config. This component formulates a machine-readable request: a protocol buffer that can be understood by the Auxon Solver. It applies light sanity checking to the configuration, and is designed to act as the gateway between the human-configurable intent definition and the machine-parseable optimization request.
Auxon Solver is the brain of the tool. It formulates the giant mixed-integer or linear program based upon the optimization request received from the Configuration Language Engine. It is designed to be very scalable, which allows the solver to run in parallel upon hundreds or even thousands of machines running within Google's clusters. In addition to mixed-integer linear programming toolkits, there are also components within the Auxon Solver that handle tasks such as scheduling, managing a pool of workers, and descending decision trees.
Allocation Plan is the output of the Auxon Solver. It prescribes which resources should be allocated to which services in what locations. It is the computed implementation details of the intent-based definition of the capacity planning problem's requirements. The Allocation Plan also includes information about any requirements that could not be satisfied-for example, if a requirement couldn't be met due to a lack of resources, or competing requirements that were otherwise too strict.

Requirements and Implementation: Successes and Lessons Learned

Auxon was first imagined by an SRE and a technical program manager who had separately been tasked by their respective teams with capacity planning large portions of Google's infrastructure. Having performed manual capacity planning

in spreadsheets, they were well positioned to understand the inefficiencies and opportunities for improvement through automation, and the features such a tool might require.
Throughout Auxon's development, the SRE team behind the product continued to be deeply involved in the production world. The team maintained a role in on- call rotations for several of Google's services, and participated in design discussions and technical leadership of these services. Through these ongoing interactions, the team was able to stay grounded in the production world: they acted as both the consumer and developer of their own product. When the product failed, the team was directly impacted. Feature requests were informed through the team's own firsthand experiences. Not only did firsthand experience of the problem space buy a huge sense of ownership in the product's success, but it also helped give the product credibility and legitimacy within SRE.

Approximation

Don't focus on perfection and purity of solution, especially if the bounds of the problem aren't well known. Launch and iterate.
Any sufficiently complex software engineering effort is bound to encounter uncertainty as to how a component should be designed or how a problem should be tackled. Auxon met with such uncertainty early in its development because the linear programming world was uncharted territory for the team members. The limitations of linear programming, which seemed to be a central part of how the product would likely function, were not well understood. To address the team's consternation over this insufficiently understood dependency, we opted to initially build a simplified solver engine (the so-called "Stupid Solver") that applied some simple heuristics as to how services should be arranged based upon the user's specified requirements. While the Stupid Solver would never yield a truly optimal solution, it gave the team a sense that our vision for Auxon was achievable even if we didn't build something perfect from day one.
When deploying approximation to help speed development, it's important to undertake the work in a way that allows the team to make future enhancements and revisit approximation. In the case of the Stupid Solver, the entire solver interface was abstracted away within Auxon such that the solver internals could be swapped out at a later date. Eventually, as we built confidence in a unified linear programming model, it was a simple operation to switch out the Stupid

Solver for something, well, smarter.

Auxon's product requirements also had some unknowns. Building software with fuzzy requirements can be a frustrating challenge, but some degree of uncertainty need not be a showstopper. Use this fuzziness as an incentive to ensure that the software is designed to be both general and modular. For instance, one of the aims of the Auxon project was to integrate with automation systems within Google to allow an Allocation Plan to be directly enacted on production (assigning resources and turning up/turning down/resizing services as appropriate). However, at the time, the world of automation systems was in a great deal of flux, as a huge variety of approaches were in use. Rather than try to design unique solutions to allow Auxon to work with each individual tool, we instead shaped the Allocation Plan to be universally useful such that these automation systems could work on their own integration points. This "agnostic" approach became key to Auxon's process for onboarding new customers, because it allowed customers to begin using Auxon without switching to a particular turnup automation tool, forecasting tool, or performance data tool.
We also leveraged modular designs to deal with fuzzy requirements when building a model of machine performance within Auxon. Data on future machine platform performance (e.g., CPU) was scarce, but our users wanted a way to model various scenarios of machine power. We abstracted away the machine data behind a single interface, allowing the user to swap in different models of future machine performance. We later extended this modularity further, based on increasingly defined requirements, to provide a simple machine performance modeling library that worked within this interface.
If there's one theme to draw from our Auxon case study, it's that the old motto of "launch and iterate" is particularly relevant in SRE software development projects. Don't wait for the perfect design; rather, keep the overall vision in mind while moving ahead with design and development. When you encounter areas of uncertainty, design the software to be flexible enough so that if process or strategy changes at a higher level, you don't incur a huge rework cost. But at the same time, stay grounded by making sure that general solutions have a real- world-specific implementation that demonstrates the utility of the design.

Raising Awareness and Driving Adoption

As with any product, SRE-developed software must be designed with knowledge

of its users and requirements. It needs to drive adoption through utility, performance, and demonstrated ability to both benefit Google's production reliability goals and to better the lives of SREs. The process of socializing a product and achieving buy-in across an organization is key to the project's success.
Don't underestimate the effort required to raise awareness and interest in your software product-a single presentation or email announcement isn't enough. Socializing internal software tools to a large audience demands all of the following:
A consistent and coherent approach User advocacy
The sponsorship of senior engineers and management, to whom you will have to demonstrate the utility of your product
It's important to consider the perspective of the customer in making your product usable. An engineer might not have the time or the inclination to dig into the source code to figure out how to use a tool. Although internal customers are generally more tolerant of rough edges and early alphas than external customers, it's still necessary to provide documentation. SREs are busy, and if your solution is too difficult or confusing, they will write their own solution.

Set expectations

When an engineer with years of familiarity in a problem space begins designing a product, it's easy to imagine a utopian end-state for the work. However, it's important to differentiate aspirational goals of the product from minimum success criteria (or Minimum Viable Product). Projects can lose credibility and fail by promising too much, too soon; at the same time, if a product doesn't promise a sufficiently rewarding outcome, it can be difficult to overcome the necessary activation energy to convince internal teams to try something new. Demonstrating steady, incremental progress via small releases raises user confidence in your team's ability to deliver useful software.
In the case of Auxon, we struck a balance by planning a long-term roadmap alongside short-term fixes. Teams were promised that:
Any onboarding and configuration efforts would provide the immediate

benefit of alleviating the pain of manually bin packing short-term resource requests.
As additional features were developed for Auxon, the same configuration files would carry over and provide new, and much broader, long-term cost savings and other benefits. The project road map enabled services to quickly determine if their use cases or required features weren't implemented in the early versions. Meanwhile, Auxon's iterative development approach fed into development priorities and new milestones for the road map.

Identify appropriate customers

The team developing Auxon realized that a one-size solution might not fit all; many larger teams already had home-grown solutions for capacity planning that worked passably well. While their custom tools weren't perfect, these teams didn't experience sufficient pain in the capacity planning process to try a new tool, especially an alpha release with rough edges.
The initial versions of Auxon intentionally targeted teams that had no existing capacity planning processes in place. Because these teams would have to invest configuration effort whether they adopted an existing tool or our new approach, they were interested in adopting the newest tool. The early successes Auxon achieved with these teams demonstrated the utility of the project, and turned the customers themselves into advocates for the tool. Quantifying the usefulness of the product proved further beneficial; when we onboarded one of Google's Business Areas, the team authored a case study detailing the process and comparing the before and after results. The time savings and reduction of human toil alone presented a huge incentive for other teams to give Auxon a try.

Customer service

Even though software developed within SRE targets an audience of TPMs and engineers with high technical proficiency, any sufficiently innovative software still presents a learning curve to new users. Don't be afraid to provide white glove customer support for early adopters to help them through the onboarding process. Sometimes automation also entails a host of emotional concerns, such as fear that someone's job will be replaced by a shell script. By working one-on- one with early users, you can address those fears personally, and demonstrate

that rather than owning the toil of performing a tedious task manually, the team instead owns the configurations, processes, and ultimate results of their technical work. Later adopters are convinced by the happy examples of early adopters.
Furthermore, because Google's SRE teams are distributed across the globe, early-adopter advocates for a project are particularly beneficial, because they can serve as local experts for other teams interested in trying out the project.

Designing at the right level

An idea that we've termed agnosticism-writing the software to be generalized to allow myriad data sources as input-was a key principle of Auxon's design. Agnosticism meant that customers weren't required to commit to any one tool in order to use the Auxon framework. This approach allowed Auxon to remain of sufficient general utility even as teams with divergent use cases began to use it. We approached potential users with the message, "come as you are; we'll work with what you've got." By avoiding over-customizing for one or two big users, we achieved broader adoption across the organization and lowered the barrier to entry for new services.
We've also consciously endeavored to avoid the pitfall of defining success as 100% adoption across the organization. In many cases, there are diminishing returns on closing the last mile to enable a feature set that is sufficient for every service in the long tail at Google.

Team Dynamics

In selecting engineers to work on an SRE software development product, we've found great benefit from creating a seed team that combines generalists who are able to get up to speed quickly on a new topic with engineers possessing a breadth of knowledge and experience. A diversity of experiences covers blind spots as well as the pitfalls of assuming that every team's use case is the same as yours.
It's essential for your team to establish a working relationship with necessary specialists, and for your engineers to be comfortable working in a new problem space. For SRE teams at most companies, venturing into this new problem space requires outsourcing tasks or working with consultants, but SRE teams at larger organizations may be able to partner with in-house experts. During the initial

phases of conceptualizing and designing Auxon, we presented our design document to Google's in-house teams that specialize in Operations Research and Quantitative Analysis in order to draw upon their expertise in the field and to bootstrap the Auxon team's knowledge about capacity planning.
As project development continued and Auxon's feature set grew more broad and complex, the team acquired members with backgrounds in statistics and mathematical optimization, which at a smaller company might be akin to bringing an outside consultant in-house. These new team members were able to identify areas for improvement when the project's basic functionality was complete and adding finesse had become our top priority.
The right time to engage specialists will, of course, vary from project to project. As a rough guideline, the project should be successfully off the ground and demonstrably successful, such that the skills of the current team would be significantly bolstered by the additional expertise.

Fostering Software Engineering in SRE
What makes a project a good candidate to take the leap from one-off tool to fully fledged software engineering effort? Strong positive signals include engineers with firsthand experience in the relative domain who are interested in working on the project, and a target user base that is highly technical (and therefore able to provide high-signal bug reports during the early phases of development). The project should provide noticeable benefits, such as reducing toil for SREs, improving an existing piece of infrastructure, or streamlining a complex process.
It's important for the project to fit into the overall set of objectives for the organization, so that engineering leaders can weigh its potential impact and subsequently advocate for your project, both with their reporting teams and with other teams that might interface with their teams. Cross-organizational socialization and review help prevent disjoint or overlapping efforts, and a product that can easily be established as furthering a department-wide objective is easier to staff and support.
What makes a poor candidate project? Many of the same red flags you might instinctively identify in any software project, such as software that touches many moving parts at once, or software design that requires an all-or-nothing approach that prevents iterative development. Because Google SRE teams are currently

organized around the services they run, SRE-developed projects are particularly at risk of being overly specific work that only benefits a small percentage of the organization. Because team incentives are aligned primarily to provide a great experience for the users of one particular service, projects often fail to generalize to a broader use case as standardization across SRE teams comes in second place. At the opposite end of the spectrum, overly generic frameworks can be equally problematic; if a tool strives to be too flexible and too universal, it runs the risk of not quite fitting any use case, and therefore having insufficient value in and of itself. Projects with grand scope and abstract goals often require significant development effort, but lack the concrete use cases required to deliver end-user benefit on a reasonable time frame.
As an example of a broad use case: a layer-3 load balancer developed by Google SREs proved so successful over the years that it was repurposed as a customer- facing product offering via Google Cloud Load Balancer [Eis16].

Successfully Building a Software Engineering Culture in SRE: Staffing and Development Time

SREs are often generalists, as the desire to learn breadth-first instead of depth- first lends itself well to understanding the bigger picture (and there are few pictures bigger than the intricate inner workings of modern technical infrastructure). These engineers often have strong coding and software development skills, but may not have the traditional SWE experience of being part of a product team or having to think about customer feature requests. A quote from an engineer on an early SRE software development project sums up the conventional SRE approach to software: "I have a design doc; why do we need requirements?" Partnering with engineers, TPMs, or PMs who are familiar with user-facing software development can help build a team software development culture that brings together the best of both software product development and hands-on production experience.
Dedicated, noninterrupted, project work time is essential to any software development effort. Dedicated project time is necessary to enable progress on a project, because it's nearly impossible to write code-much less to concentrate on larger, more impactful projects-when you're thrashing between several tasks in the course of an hour. Therefore, the ability to work on a software project without interrupts is often an attractive reason for engineers to begin working on a development project. Such time must be aggressively defended.

The majority of software products developed within SRE begin as side projects whose utility leads them to grow and become formalized. At this point, a product may branch off into one of several possible directions:
Remain a grassroots effort developed in engineers' spare time
Become established as a formal project through structured processes (see Getting There)
Gain executive sponsorship from within SRE leadership to expand into a fully staffed software development effort
However, in any of these scenarios-and this is a point worth stressing-it's essential that the SREs involved in any development effort continue working as SREs instead of becoming full-time developers embedded in the SRE organization. Immersion in the world of production gives SREs performing development work an invaluable perspective, as they are both the creator and the customer for any product.

Getting There

If you like the idea of organized software development in SRE, you're probably wondering how to introduce a software development model to an SRE organization focused on production support.
First, recognize that this goal is as much an organizational change as it is a technical challenge. SREs are used to working closely with their teammates, quickly analyzing and reacting to problems. Therefore, you're working against the natural instinct of an SRE to quickly write some code to meet their immediate needs. If your SRE team is small, this approach may not be problematic. However, as your organization grows, this ad hoc approach won't scale, instead resulting in largely functional, yet narrow or single-purpose, software solutions that can't be shared, which inevitably lead to duplicated efforts and wasted time.
Next, think about what you want to achieve by developing software in SRE. Do you just want to foster better software development practices within your team, or are you interested in software development that produces results that can be used across teams, possibly as a standard for the organization? In larger established organizations, the latter change will take time, possibly spanning multiple years. Such a change needs to be tackled on multiple fronts, but has a

higher payback. The following are some guidelines from Google's experience: Create and communicate a clear message
It's important to define and communicate your strategy, plans, and-most importantly-the benefits SRE gains from this effort. SREs are a skeptical lot (in fact, skepticism is a trait for which we specifically hire); an SRE's initial response to such an effort will likely be, "that sounds like too much overhead" or "it will never work." Start by making a compelling case of how this strategy will help SRE; for example:
Consistent and supported software solutions speed ramp-up for new SREs.
Reducing the number of ways to perform the same task allows the entire department to benefit from the skills any single team has developed, thus making knowledge and effort portable across teams.
When SREs start to ask questions about how your strategy will work, rather than if the strategy should be pursued, you know you've passed the first hurdle.
Evaluate your organization's capabilities

SREs have many skills, but it's relatively common for an SRE to lack experience as part of a team that built and shipped a product to a set of users. In order to develop useful software, you're effectively creating a product team. That team includes required roles and skills that your SRE organization may not have formerly demanded. Will someone play the role of product manager, acting as the customer advocate? Does your tech lead or project manager have the skills and/or experience to run an agile development process?
Begin filling these gaps by taking advantage of the skills already present in your company. Ask your product development team to help you establish agile practices via training or coaching. Solicit consulting time from a product manager to help you define product requirements and prioritize feature work. Given a large enough software-development opportunity, there may be a case to hire dedicated people for these roles. Making the case to hire for these roles is easier once you have some positive experiment results.

Launch and iterate

As you initiate an SRE software development program, your efforts will be followed by many watchful eyes. It's important to establish credibility by delivering some product of value in a reasonable amount of time. Your first round of products should aim for relatively straightforward and achievable targets-ones without controversy or existing solutions. We also found success in pairing this approach with a six-month rhythm of product update releases that provided additional useful features. This release cycle allowed teams to focus on identifying the right set of features to build, and then building those features while simultaneously learning how to be a productive software development team. After the initial launch, some Google teams moved to a push-on-green model for even faster delivery and feedback.
Don't lower your standards

As you start to develop software, you may be tempted to cut corners. Resist this urge by holding yourself to the same standards to which your product development teams are held. For example:
Ask yourself: if this product were created by a separate dev team, would you onboard the product?
If your solution enjoys broad adoption, it may become critical to SREs in order to successfully perform their jobs. Therefore, reliability is of utmost importance. Do you have proper code review practices in place? Do you have end-to-end or integration testing? Have another SRE team review the product for production readiness as they would if onboarding any other service.
It takes a long time to build credibility for your software development efforts, but only a short time to lose credibility due to a misstep.

Conclusions
Software engineering projects within Google SRE have flourished as the organization has grown, and in many cases the lessons learned from and successful execution of earlier software development projects have paved the way for subsequent endeavors. The unique hands-on production experience that

SREs bring to developing tools can lead to innovative approaches to age-old problems, as seen with the development of Auxon to address the complex problem of capacity planning. SRE-driven software projects are also noticeably beneficial to the company in developing a sustainable model for supporting services at scale. Because SREs often develop software to streamline inefficient processes or automate common tasks, these projects mean that the SRE team doesn't have to scale linearly with the size of the services they support. Ultimately, the benefits of having SREs devoting some of their time to software development are reaped by the company, the SRE organization, and the SREs themselves.

Chapter 19 - Load Balancing at the Frontend
Written by Piotr Lewandowski Edited by Sarah Chavis
We serve many millions of requests every second and, as you may have already guessed, we use more than a single computer to handle this demand. But even if we did have a supercomputer that was somehow able to handle all these requests (imagine the network connectivity such a configuration would require!), we still wouldn't employ a strategy that relied upon a single point of failure; when you're dealing with large-scale systems, putting all your eggs in one basket is a recipe for disaster.
This chapter focuses on high-level load balancing-how we balance user traffic between datacenters. The following chapter zooms in to explore how we implement load balancing inside a datacenter.

Power Isn't the Answer
For the sake of argument, let's assume we have an unbelievably powerful machine and a network that never fails. Would that configuration be sufficient to meet Google's needs? No. Even this configuration would still be limited by the physical constraints associated with our networking infrastructure. For example, the speed of light is a limiting factor on the communication speeds for fiber optic cable, which creates an upper bound on how quickly we can serve data based upon the distance it has to travel. Even in an ideal world, relying on an infrastructure with a single point of failure is a bad idea.
In reality, Google has thousands of machines and even more users, many of whom issue multiple requests at a time. Traffic load balancing is how we decide which of the many, many machines in our datacenters will serve a particular request. Ideally, traffic is distributed across multiple network links, datacenters, and machines in an "optimal" fashion. But what does "optimal" mean in this context? There's actually no single answer, because the optimal solution

depends heavily on a variety of factors:

The hierarchical level at which we evaluate the problem (global versus local)
The technical level at which we evaluate the problem (hardware versus software)
The nature of the traffic we're dealing with

Let's start by reviewing two common traffic scenarios: a basic search request and a video upload request. Users want to get their query results quickly, so the most important variable for the search request is latency. On the other hand, users expect video uploads to take a non-negligible amount of time, but also want such requests to succeed the first time, so the most important variable for the video upload is throughput. The differing needs of the two requests play a role in how we determine the optimal distribution for each request at the global level:
The search request is sent to the nearest available datacenter-as measured in round-trip time (RTT)-because we want to minimize the latency on the request.
The video upload stream is routed via a different path-perhaps to a link that is currently underutilized-to maximize the throughput at the expense of latency.
But on the local level, inside a given datacenter, we often assume that all machines within the building are equally distant to the user and connected to the same network. Therefore, optimal distribution of load focuses on optimal resource utilization and protecting a single server from overloading.
Of course, this example presents a vastly simplified picture. In reality, many more considerations factor into optimal load distribution: some requests may be directed to a datacenter that is slightly farther away in order to keep caches warm, or non-interactive traffic may be routed to a completely different region to avoid network congestion. Load balancing, especially for large systems, is anything but straightforward and static. At Google, we've approached the problem by load balancing at multiple levels, two of which are described in the following sections. For the sake of presenting a concrete discussion, we'll

consider HTTP requests sent over TCP. Load balancing of stateless services (like DNS over UDP) differs slightly, but most of the mechanisms described here should be applicable to stateless services as well.

Load Balancing Using DNS
Before a client can even send an HTTP request, it often has to look up an IP address using DNS. This provides the perfect opportunity to introduce our first layer of load balancing: DNS load balancing. The simplest solution is to return multiple A or AAAA records in the DNS reply and let the client pick an IP address arbitrarily. While conceptually simple and trivial to implement, this solution poses multiple challenges.

The first problem is that it provides very little control over the client behavior: records are selected randomly, and each will attract a roughly equal amount of traffic. Can we mitigate this problem? In theory, we could use SRV records to specify record weights and priorities, but SRV records have not yet been adopted for HTTP.
Another potential problem stems from the fact that usually the client cannot determine the closest address. We can mitigate this scenario by using an anycast address for authoritative nameservers and leverage the fact that DNS queries will flow to the closest address. In its reply, the server can return addresses routed to the closest datacenter. A further improvement builds a map of all networks and their approximate physical locations, and serves DNS replies based on that mapping. However, this solution comes at the cost of having a much more complex DNS server implementation and maintaining a pipeline that will keep the location mapping up to date.
Of course, none of these solutions are trivial, due to a fundamental characteristic of DNS: end users rarely talk to authoritative nameservers directly. Instead, a recursive DNS server usually lies somewhere between end users and nameservers. This server proxies queries between a user and a server and often provides a caching layer. The DNS middleman has three very important implications on traffic management:
Recursive resolution of IP addresses Nondeterministic reply paths

Additional caching complications

Recursive resolution of IP addresses is problematic, as the IP address seen by the authoritative nameserver does not belong to a user; instead, it's the recursive resolver's. This is a serious limitation, because it only allows reply optimization for the shortest distance between resolver and the nameserver. A possible solution is to use the EDNS0 extension proposed in [Con15], which includes information about the client's subnet in the DNS query sent by a recursive resolver. This way, an authoritative nameserver returns a response that is optimal from the user's perspective, rather than the resolver's perspective. While this is not yet the official standard, its obvious advantages have led the biggest DNS
resolvers (such as OpenDNS and Google103) to support it already.
Not only is it difficult to find the optimal IP address to return to the nameserver for a given user's request, but that nameserver may be responsible for serving thousands or millions of users, across regions varying from a single office to an entire continent. For instance, a large national ISP might run nameservers for its entire network from one datacenter, yet have network interconnects in each metropolitan area. The ISP's nameservers would then return a response with the IP address best suited for their datacenter, despite there being better network paths for all users!
Finally, recursive resolvers typically cache responses and forward those responses within limits indicated by the time-to-live (TTL) field in the DNS record. The end result is that estimating the impact of a given reply is difficult: a single authoritative reply may reach a single user or multiple thousands of users. We solve this problem in two ways:
We analyze traffic changes and continuously update our list of known DNS resolvers with the approximate size of the user base behind a given resolver, which allows us to track the potential impact of any given resolver.
We estimate the geographical distribution of the users behind each tracked resolver to increase the chance that we direct those users to the best location.
Estimating geographic distribution is particularly tricky if the user base is distributed across large regions. In such cases, we make trade-offs to select the

best location and optimize the experience for the majority of users.

But what does "best location" really mean in the context of DNS load balancing? The most obvious answer is the location closest to the user. However (as if determining users' locations isn't difficult in and of itself), there are additional criteria. The DNS load balancer needs to make sure that the datacenter it selects has enough capacity to serve requests from users that are likely to receive its reply. It also needs to know that the selected datacenter and its network connectivity are in good shape, because directing user requests to a datacenter that's experiencing power or networking problems isn't ideal. Fortunately, we can integrate the authoritative DNS server with our global control systems that track traffic, capacity, and the state of our infrastructure.
The third implication of the DNS middleman is related to caching. Given that authoritative nameservers cannot flush resolvers' caches, DNS records need a relatively low TTL. This effectively sets a lower bound on how quickly DNS changes can be propagated to users.104 Unfortunately, there is little we can do
other than to keep this in mind as we make load balancing decisions.

Despite all of these problems, DNS is still the simplest and most effective way to balance load before the user's connection even starts. On the other hand, it should be clear that load balancing with DNS on its own is not sufficient. Keep in mind that all DNS replies served should fit within the 512-byte limit105 set by
RFC 1035 [Moc87]. This limit sets an upper bound on the number of addresses we can squeeze into a single DNS reply, and that number is almost certainly less than our number of servers.
To really solve the problem of frontend load balancing, this initial level of DNS load balancing should be followed by a level that takes advantage of virtual IP addresses.

Load Balancing at the Virtual IP Address
Virtual IP addresses (VIPs) are not assigned to any particular network interface. Instead, they are usually shared across many devices. However, from the user's perspective, the VIP remains a single, regular IP address. In theory, this practice allows us to hide implementation details (such as the number of machines behind a particular VIP) and facilitates maintenance, because we can schedule upgrades

or add more machines to the pool without the user knowing.

In practice, the most important part of VIP implementation is a device called the network load balancer. The balancer receives packets and forwards them to one of the machines behind the VIP. These backends can then further process the request.
There are several possible approaches the balancer can take in deciding which backend should receive the request. The first (and perhaps most intuitive) approach is to always prefer the least loaded backend. In theory, this approach should result in the best end-user experience because requests are always routed to the least busy machine. Unfortunately, this logic breaks down quickly in the case of stateful protocols, which must use the same backend for the duration of a request. This requirement means that the balancer must keep track of all connections sent through it in order to make sure that all subsequent packets are sent to the correct backend. The alternative is to use some parts of a packet to create a connection ID (possibly using a hash function and some information from the packet), and to use the connection ID to select a backend. For example, the connection ID could be expressed as:

id(packet) mod N

where id is a function that takes packet as an input and produces a connection ID, and N is the number of configured backends.

This avoids storing state, and all packets belonging to a single connection are always forwarded to the same backend. Success? Not quite yet. What happens if one backend fails and needs to be removed from the backend list? Suddenly N becomes N-1 and then, id(packet) mod N becomes id(packet) mod N-1. Almost every packet suddenly maps to a different backend! If backends don't share any state between themselves, this remapping forces a reset of almost all of the existing connections. This scenario is definitely not the best user experience, even if such events are infrequent.

Fortunately, there is an alternate solution that doesn't require keeping the state of every connection in memory, but won't force all connections to reset when a single machine goes down: consistent hashing. Proposed in 1997, consistent hashing [Kar97] describes a way to provide a mapping algorithm that remains relatively stable even when new backends are added to or removed from the list. This approach minimizes the disruption to existing connections when the pool of

backends changes. As a result, we can usually use simple connection tracking, but fall back to consistent hashing when the system is under pressure (e.g., during an ongoing denial of service attack).
Returning to the larger question: how exactly should a network load balancer forward packets to a selected VIP backend? One solution is to perform a Network Address Translation. However, this requires keeping an entry of every single connection in the tracking table, which precludes having a completely stateless fallback mechanism.
Another solution is to modify information on the data link layer (layer 2 of the OSI networking model). By changing the destination MAC address of a forwarded packet, the balancer can leave all the information in upper layers intact, so the backend receives the original source and destination IP addresses. The backend can then send a reply directly to the original sender-a technique known as Direct Server Response (DSR). If user requests are small and replies are large (e.g., most HTTP requests), DSR provides tremendous savings, because only a small fraction of traffic need traverse the load balancer. Even better, DSR does not require us to keep state on the load balancer device. Unfortunately, using layer 2 for internal load balancing does incur serious disadvantages when deployed at scale: all machines (i.e., all load balancers and all their backends) must be able to reach each other at the data link layer. This isn't an issue if this connectivity can be supported by the network and the number of machines doesn't grow excessively, because all the machines need to reside in a single broadcast domain. As you may imagine, Google outgrew this solution quite some time ago, and had to find an alternate approach.
Our current VIP load balancing solution [Eis16] uses packet encapsulation. A network load balancer puts the forwarded packet into another IP packet with Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE) [Han94], and uses a backend's address as the destination. A backend receiving the packet strips off the outer IP+GRE layer and processes the inner IP packet as if it were delivered directly to its network interface. The network load balancer and the backend no longer need to exist in the same broadcast domain; they can even be on separate continents as long as a route between the two exists.
Packet encapsulation is a powerful mechanism that provides great flexibility in the way our networks are designed and evolve. Unfortunately, encapsulation also comes with a price: inflated packet size. Encapsulation introduces overhead (24

bytes in the case of IPv4+GRE, to be precise), which can cause the packet to exceed the available Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) size and require fragmentation.
Once the packet reaches the datacenter, fragmentation can be avoided by using a larger MTU within the datacenter; however, this approach requires a network that supports large Protocol Data Units. As with many things at scale, load balancing sounds simple on the surface-load balance early and load balance often-but the difficulty is in the details, both for frontend load balancing and for handling packets once they reach the datacenter.

103See	https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/public-dns- announce/67oxFjSLeUM.

104Sadly, not all DNS resolvers respect the TTL value set by authoritative nameservers.

105Otherwise, users must establish a TCP connection just to get a list of IP addresses.