Chapter 20 - Load Balancing in the Datacenter
Written by Alejandro Forero Cuervo Edited by Sarah Chavis
This chapter focuses on load balancing within the datacenter. Specifically, it discusses algorithms for distributing work within a given datacenter for a stream of queries. We cover application-level policies for routing requests to individual servers that can process them. Lower-level networking principles (e.g., switches, packet routing) and datacenter selection are outside of the scope of this chapter.
Assume there is a stream of queries arriving to the datacenter-these could be coming from the datacenter itself, remote datacenters, or a mix of both-at a rate that doesn't exceed the resources that the datacenter has to process them (or only exceeds it for very short amounts of time). Also assume that there are services within the datacenter, against which these queries operate. These services are implemented as many homogeneous, interchangeable server processes mostly running on different machines. The smallest services typically have at least three such processes (using fewer processes means losing 50% or more of your capacity if you lose a single machine) and the largest may have more than 10,000 processes (depending on datacenter size). In the typical case, services are composed of between 100 and 1,000 processes. We call these processes backend tasks (or just backends). Other tasks, known as client tasks, hold connections to the backend tasks. For each incoming query, a client task must decide which backend task should handle the query. Clients communicate with backends using a protocol implemented on top of a combination of TCP and UDP.
We should note that Google datacenters house a vastly diverse set of services that implement different combinations of the policies discussed in this chapter. Our working example, as just described, doesn't fit any one service directly. It's a generalized scenario that allows us to discuss the various techniques we've found useful for various services. Some of these techniques may be more (or less) applicable to specific use cases, but these techniques were designed and implemented by several Google engineers over a span of many years.

These techniques are applied at many parts of our stack. For example, most external HTTP requests reach the GFE (Google Frontend), our HTTP reverse proxying system. The GFE uses these algorithms, along with the algorithms described in Load Balancing at the Frontend, to route the request payloads and metadata to the individual processes running the applications that can process this information. This is based on a configuration that maps various URL patterns to individual applications under the control of different teams. In order to produce the response payloads (which they return to the GFE, to be returned back to browsers), these applications often use these same algorithms in turn, to communicate with the infrastructure or complementary services they depend on. Sometimes the stack of dependencies can get relatively deep, where a single incoming HTTP request can trigger a long transitive chain of dependent requests to several systems, potentially with high fan-out at various points.

The Ideal Case
In an ideal case, the load for a given service is spread perfectly over all its backend tasks and, at any given point in time, the least and most loaded backend tasks consume exactly the same amount of CPU.
We can only send traffic to a datacenter until the point at which the most loaded task reaches its capacity limit; this is depicted in Figure 20-1 for two scenarios over the same time interval. During that time, the cross-datacenter load balancing algorithm must avoid sending any additional traffic to the datacenter, because doing so risks overloading some tasks.


Figure 20-1. Two scenarios of per-task load distribution over time

As shown in the lefthand graph in Figure 20-2, a significant amount of capacity is wasted: the idle capacity of every task except the most loaded task.

Figure 20-2. Histogram of CPU used and wasted in two scenarios

More formally, let CPU[i] be the CPU rate consumed by task i at a given point of time, and suppose that task 0 is the most loaded task. Then, in the case of a large spread, we are wasting the sum of the differences in the CPU from any task to CPU[0]: that is, the sum over all tasks i of (CPU[0] - CPU[i]) will be wasted. In this case "wasted" means reserved, but unused.
This example illustrates how poor in-datacenter load balancing practices artificially limit resource availability: you may be reserving 1,000 CPUs for your service in a given datacenter, but be unable to actually use more than, say, 700 CPUs.

Identifying Bad Tasks: Flow Control and Lame Ducks
Before we can decide which backend task should receive a client request, we need to identify-and avoid-unhealthy tasks in our pool of backends.

A Simple Approach to Unhealthy Tasks: Flow Control

Assume our client tasks track the number of active requests they have sent on each connection to a backend task. When this active-request count reaches a configured limit, the client treats the backend as unhealthy and no longer sends it requests. For most backends, 100 is a reasonable limit; in the average case, requests tend to finish fast enough that it is very rare for the number of active requests from a given client to reach this limit under normal operating conditions. This (very basic!) form of flow control also serves as a simplistic form of load balancing: if a given backend task becomes overloaded and requests start piling up, clients will avoid that backend, and the workload spreads organically among the other backend tasks.
Unfortunately, this very simplistic approach only protects backend tasks against very extreme forms of overload and it's very easy for backends to become overloaded well before this limit is ever reached. The converse is also true: in some cases, clients may reach this limit when their backends still have plenty of spare resources. For example, some backends may have very long-lived requests that prohibit quick responses. We've seen cases in which this default limit has backfired, causing all backend tasks to become unreachable, with requests blocked in the clients until they time out and fail. Raising the active-request limit can avoid this situation, but doesn't solve the underlying problem of knowing if

a task is truly unhealthy or simply slow to respond.

A Robust Approach to Unhealthy Tasks: Lame Duck State

From a client perspective, a given backend task can be in any of the following states:
Healthy

The backend task has initialized correctly and is processing requests.

Refusing connections

The backend task is unresponsive. This can happen because the task is starting up or shutting down, or because the backend is in an abnormal state (though it would be rare for a backend to stop listening on its port if it is not shutting down).
Lame duck

The backend task is listening on its port and can serve, but is explicitly asking clients to stop sending requests.
When a task enters lame duck state, it broadcasts that fact to all its active clients. But what about inactive clients? With Google's RPC implementation, inactive clients (i.e., clients with no active TCP connections) still send periodic UDP health checks. The result is that lame duck information is propagated quickly to all clients-typically in 1 or 2 RTT-regardless of their current state.
The main advantage of allowing a task to exist in a quasi-operational lame duck state is that it simplifies clean shutdown, which avoids serving errors to all the unlucky requests that happened to be active on backend tasks that are shutting down. Bringing down a backend task that has active requests without serving any errors facilitates code pushes, maintenance activities, or machine failures that may require restarting all related tasks. Such a shutdown would follow these general steps:
1. The job scheduler sends a SIGTERM signal to the backend task.

2. The backend task enters lame duck state and asks its clients to send new

requests to other backend tasks. This is done through an API call in the RPC implementation that is explicitly called in the SIGTERM handler.
3. Any ongoing request started before the backend task entered lame duck state (or after it entered lame duck state but before a client detected it) executes normally.
4. As responses flow back to the clients, the number of active requests against the backend gradually decreases to zero.
5. After a configured interval, the backend task either exits cleanly or the job scheduler kills it. The interval should be set to a large enough value that all typical requests have sufficient time to finish. This value is service dependent, but a good rule of thumb is between 10s and 150s depending on client complexity.
This strategy also allows a client to establish connections to backend tasks while performing potentially long-lived initialization procedures (and thus are not yet ready to start serving). The backend tasks could otherwise start listening for connections only when they're ready to serve, but doing so would delay the negotiation of the connections unnecessarily. As soon as the backend task is ready to start serving, it signals this explicitly to the clients.

Limiting the Connections Pool with Subsetting
In addition to health management, another consideration for load balancing is subsetting: limiting the pool of potential backend tasks with which a client task interacts.
Each client in our RPC system maintains a pool of long-lived connections to its backends that it uses to send new requests. These connections are typically established early on as the client is starting and usually remain open, with requests flowing through them, until the client's death. An alternative model would be to establish and tear down a connection for each request, but this model has significant resource and latency costs. In the corner case of a connection that remains idle for a long time, our RPC implementation has an optimization that switches the connection to a cheap "inactive" mode where, for example, the frequency of health checks is reduced and the underlying TCP connection is dropped in favor of UDP.

Every connection requires some memory and CPU (due to periodic health checking) at both ends. While this overhead is small in theory, it can quickly become significant when it occurs across many machines. Subsetting avoids the situation in which a single client connects to a very large number of backend tasks or a single backend task receives connections from a very large number of client tasks. In both cases, you potentially waste a very large amount of resources for very little gain.

Picking the Right Subset

Picking the right subset comes down to choosing how many backend tasks each client connects to-the subset size-and the selection algorithm. We typically use a subset size of 20 to 100 backend tasks, but the "right" subset size for a system depends heavily on the typical behavior of your service. For example, you may want to use a larger subset size if:
The number of clients is significantly smaller than the number of backends. In this case, you want the number of backends per client to be large enough that you don't end up with backend tasks that will never receive any traffic.
There are frequent load imbalances within the client jobs (i.e., one client task sends more requests than others). This scenario is typical in situations where clients occasionally send bursts of requests. In this case, the clients themselves receive requests from other clients that occasionally have a large fan-out (e.g., "read all the information of all the followers of a given user"). Because a burst of requests will be concentrated in the client's assigned subset, you need a larger subset size to ensure the load is spread evenly across the larger set of available backend tasks.
Once the subset size is determined, we need an algorithm to define the subset of backend tasks each client task will use. This may seem like a simple task, but it becomes complex quickly when working with large-scale systems where efficient provisioning is crucial and system restarts are guaranteed.
The selection algorithm for clients should assign backends uniformly to optimize resource provisioning. For example, if subsetting overloads one backend by 10%, the whole set of backends needs to be overprovisioned by 10%. The algorithm should also handle restarts and failures gracefully and robustly by continuing to load backends as uniformly as possible while minimizing churn. In

this case, "churn" relates to backend replacement selection. For example, when a backend task becomes unavailable, its clients may need to temporarily pick a replacement backend. When a replacement backend is selected, clients must create new TCP connections (and likely perform application-level negotiation), which creates additional overhead. Similarly, when a client task restarts, it needs to reopen the connections to all its backends.
The algorithm should also handle resizes in the number of clients and/or number of backends, with minimal connection churn and without knowing these numbers in advance. This functionality is particularly important (and tricky) when the entire set of client or backend tasks are restarted one at a time (e.g., to push a new version). As backends are pushed, we want clients to continue serving, transparently, with as little connection churn as possible.

A Subset Selection Algorithm: Random Subsetting

A naive implementation of a subset selection algorithm might have each client randomly shuffle the list of backends once and fill its subset by selecting resolvable/healthy backends from the list. Shuffling once and then picking backends from the start of the list handles restarts and failures robustly (e.g., with relatively little churn) because it explicitly limits them from consideration. However, we've found that this strategy actually works very poorly in most practical scenarios because it spreads load very unevenly.
During initial work on load balancing, we implemented random subsetting and calculated the expected load for various cases. As an example, consider:
300 clients

300 backends

A subset size of 30% (each client connects to 90 backends)

As Figure 20-3 shows, the least loaded backend has just 63% of the average load (57 connections, where the average is 90 connections) and the most loaded has 121% (109 connections). In most cases, a subset size of 30% is already larger than we would want to use in practice. The calculated load distribution changes every time we run the simulation while the general pattern remains.


Figure 20-3. Connection distribution with 300 clients, 300 backends, and a subset size of 30%
Unfortunately, smaller subset sizes lead to even worse imbalances. For example, Figure 20-4 depicts the results if the subset size is reduced to 10% (30 backends per client). In this case, the least loaded backend receives 50% of the average load (15 connections) and the most loaded receives 150% (45 connections).


Figure 20-4. Connection distribution with 300 clients, 300 backends, and a subset size of 10%
We concluded that for random subsetting to spread the load relatively evenly across all available tasks, we would need subset sizes as large as 75%. A subset that large is simply impractical; the variance in the number of clients connecting to a task is just too large to consider random subsetting a good subset selection policy at scale.

A Subset Selection Algorithm: Deterministic Subsetting

Google's solution to the limitations of random subsetting is deterministic subsetting. The following code implements this algorithm, described in detail next:

def Subset(backends, client_id, subset_size): subset_count = len(backends) / subset_size

# Group clients into rounds; each round uses the same shuffled lis round = client_id / subset_count
random.seed(round) random.shuffle(backends)

# The subset id corresponding to the current client: subset_id = client_id % subset_count

start = subset_id * subset_size
return backends[start:start + subset_size]

We divide client tasks into "rounds," where round i consists of subset_count consecutive client tasks, starting at task subset_count � i, and subset_count is the number of subsets (i.e., the number of backend tasks divided by the desired subset size). Within each round, each backend is assigned to exactly one client (except possibly the last round, which may not contain enough clients, so some backends may not be assigned).
For example, if we have 12 backend tasks [0, 11] and a desired subset size of 3, we will have rounds containing 4 clients each (subset_count = 12/3). If we had 10 clients, the preceding algorithm could yield the following shuffled_backends:

Round 0: [0, 6, 3, 5, 1, 7, 11, 9, 2, 4, 8, 10]

Round 1: [8, 11, 4, 0, 5, 6, 10, 3, 2, 7, 9, 1]

Round 2: [8, 3, 7, 2, 1, 4, 9, 10, 6, 5, 0, 11]

The key point to notice is that each round only assigns each backend in the entire list to one client (except the last, where we run out of clients). In this example, every backend gets assigned to exactly two or three clients.
The list should be shuffled; otherwise, clients are assigned a group of consecutive backend tasks that may all become temporarily unavailable (for example, because the backend job is being updated gradually in order, from the first task to the last). Different rounds use a different seed for shuffling. If they don't, when a backend fails, the load it was receiving is only spread among the remaining backends in its subset. If additional backends in the subset fail, the effect compounds and the situation can quickly worsen significantly: if N backends in a subset are down, their corresponding load is spread over the remaining (subset_size - N) backends. A much better approach is to spread this load over all remaining backends by using a different shuffle for each round.

When we use a different shuffle for each round, clients in the same round will start with the same shuffled list, but clients across rounds will have different shuffled lists. From here, the algorithm builds subset definitions based upon the shuffled list of backends and the desired subset size. For example:
Subset[0] = shuffled_backends[0] through shuffled_backends[2] Subset[1] = shuffled_backends[3] through shuffled_backends[5] Subset[2] = shuffled_backends[6] through shuffled_backends[8] Subset[3] = shuffled_backends[9] through shuffled_backends[11]
where shuffled_backend is the shuffled list created by each client. To assign a subset to a client task, we just take the subset that corresponds to its position within its round (e.g., (i % 4) for client[i] with four subsets):
client[0], client[4], client[8] will use subset[0]

client[1], client[5], client[9] will use subset[1] client[2], client[6], client[10] will use subset[2] client[3], client[7], client[11] will use subset[3]
Because clients across rounds will use a different value for shuffled_backends (and thus for subset) and clients within rounds use different subsets, the connection load is spread uniformly. In cases where the total number of backends is not divisible by the desired subset size, we allow a few subsets to be slightly larger than others, but in most cases the number of clients assigned to a backend will differ by at most 1.

As Figure 20-5 shows, the distribution for the former example of 300 clients each connecting to 10 of 300 backends yields very good results: each backend receives exactly the same number of connections.

Figure 20-5. Connection distribution with 300 clients and deterministic subsetting to 10 of 300 backends

Load Balancing Policies
Now that we've  established  the  groundwork  for  how a  given  client task

maintains a set of connections that are known to be healthy, let's examine load balancing policies. These are the mechanisms used by client tasks to select which backend task in its subset receives a client request. Many of the complexities in load balancing policies stem from the distributed nature of the decision-making process in which clients need to decide, in real time (and with only partial and/or stale backend state information), which backend should be used for each request.
Load balancing policies can be very simple and not take into account any information about the state of the backends (e.g., Round Robin) or can act with more information about the backends (e.g., Least-Loaded Round Robin or Weighted Round Robin).

Simple Round Robin

One very simple approach to load balancing has each client send requests in round-robin fashion to each backend task in its subset to which it can successfully connect and which isn't in lame duck state. For many years, this was our most common approach, and it's still used by many services.
Unfortunately, while Round Robin has the advantage of being very simple and performing significantly better than just selecting backend tasks randomly, the results of this policy can be very poor. While actual numbers depend on many factors, such as varying query cost and machine diversity, we've found that Round Robin can result in a spread of up to 2x in CPU consumption from the least to the most loaded task. Such a spread is extremely wasteful and occurs for a number of reasons, including:
Small subsetting Varying query costs Machine diversity
Unpredictable performance factors

Small subsetting

One of the simplest reasons Round Robin distributes load poorly is that all of its

clients may not issue requests at the same rate. Different rates of requests among clients are especially likely when vastly different processes share the same backends. In this case, and especially if you're using relatively small subset sizes, backends in the subsets of the clients generating the most traffic will naturally tend to be more loaded.

Varying query costs

Many services handle requests that require vastly different amounts of resources for processing. In practice, we've found that the semantics of many services in Google are such that the most expensive requests consume 1000x (or more) CPU than the cheapest requests. Load balancing using Round Robin is even more difficult when query cost can't be predicted in advance. For example, a query such as "return all emails received by user XYZ in the last day" could be very cheap (if the user has received little email over the course of the day) or extremely expensive.
Load balancing in a system with large discrepancies in potential query cost is very problematic. It can become necessary to adjust the service interfaces to functionally cap the amount of work done per request. For example, in the case of the email query described previously, you could introduce a pagination interface and change the semantics of the request to "return the most recent 100 emails (or fewer) received by user XYZ in the last day." Unfortunately, it's often difficult to introduce such semantic changes. Not only does this require changes in all the client code, but it also entails additional consistency considerations. For example, the user may be receiving new emails or deleting emails as the client fetches emails page-by-page. For this use case, a client that naively iterates through the results and concatenates the responses (rather than paginating based on a fixed view of the data) will likely produce an inconsistent view, repeating some messages and/or skipping others.
To keep interfaces (and their implementations) simple, services are often defined to allow the most expensive requests to consume 100, 1,000, or even 10,000 times more resources than the cheapest requests. However, varying resource requirements per-request naturally mean that some backend tasks will be unlucky and occasionally receive more expensive requests than others. The extent to which this situation affects load balancing depends on how expensive the most expensive requests are. For example, for one of our Java backends, queries consume around 15 ms of CPU on average but some queries can easily

require up to 10 seconds. Each task in this backend reserves multiple CPU cores, which reduces latency by allowing some of the computations to happen in parallel. But despite these reserved cores, when a backend receives one of these large queries, its load increases significantly for a few seconds. A poorly behaved task may run out of memory or even stop responding entirely (e.g., due to memory thrashing), but even in the normal case (i.e., the backend has sufficient resources and its load normalizes once the large query completes), the latency of other requests suffers due to resource competition with the expensive request.

Machine diversity

Another challenge to Simple Round Robin is the fact that not all machines in the same datacenter are necessarily the same. A given datacenter may have machines with CPUs of varying performance, and therefore, the same request may represent a significantly different amount of work for different machines.
Dealing with machine diversity-without requiring strict homogeneity-was a challenge for many years at Google. In theory, the solution to working with heterogeneous resource capacity in a fleet is simple: scale the CPU reservations depending on the processor/machine type. However, in practice, rolling out this solution required significant effort because it required our job scheduler to account for resource equivalencies based on average machine performance across a sampling of services. For example, 2 CPU units in machine X (a "slow" machine) is equivalent to 0.8 CPU units in machine Y (a "fast" machine). With this information, the job scheduler is then required to adjust CPU reservations for a process based upon the equivalence factor and the type of machine on which the process was scheduled. In an attempt to mitigate this complexity, we created a virtual unit for CPU rate called "GCU" (Google Compute Units). GCUs became the standard for modeling CPU rates, and were used to maintain a mapping from each CPU architecture in our datacenters to its corresponding GCU based upon its performance.

Unpredictable performance factors

Perhaps the largest complicating factor for Simple Round Robin is that machines
-or, more accurately, the performance of backend tasks-may differ vastly due to several unpredictable aspects that cannot be accounted for statically.

Two of the many unpredictable factors that contribute to performance include: Antagonistic neighbors
Other processes (often completely unrelated and run by different teams) can have a significant impact on the performance of your processes. We've seen differences in performance of this nature of up to 20%. This difference mostly stems from competition for shared resources, such as space in memory caches or bandwidth, in ways that may not be directly obvious. For example, if the latency of outgoing requests from a backend task grows (because of competition for network resources with an antagonistic neighbor), the number of active requests will also grow, which may trigger increased garbage collection.
Task restarts

When a task gets restarted, it often requires significantly more resources for a few minutes. As just one example, we've seen this condition affect platforms such as Java that optimize code dynamically more than others. In response, we've actually added to the logic of some server code-we keep servers in lame duck state and prewarm them (triggering these optimizations) for a period of time after they start, until their performance is nominal. The effect of task restarts can become a sizable problem when you consider we update many servers (e.g., push new builds, which requires restarting these tasks) every day.
If your load balancing policy can't adapt to unforeseen performance limitations, you will inherently end up with a suboptimal load distribution when working at scale.

Least-Loaded Round Robin

An alternative approach to Simple Round Robin is to have each client task keep track of the number of active requests it has to each backend task in its subset and use Round Robin among the set of tasks with a minimal number of active requests.
For example, suppose a client uses a subset of backend tasks t0 to t9, and currently has the following number of active requests against each backend:

t0	t1	t2	t3	t4	t5	t6	t7	t8	t9

2	1	0	0	1	0	2	0	0	1


For a new request, the client would filter the list of potential backend tasks to just those tasks with the least number of connections (t2, t3, t5, t7, and t8) and choose a backend from that list. Let's assume it picks t2. The client's connection state table would now look like the following:

t0	t1	t2	t3	t4	t5	t6	t7	t8	t9

2	1	1	0	1	0	2	0	0	1


Assuming none of the current requests have completed, on the next request, the backend candidate pool becomes t3, t5, t7, and t8.
Let's fast-forward until we've issued four new requests. Still assuming that no request finishes in the meantime, the connection state table would look like the following:

t0	t1	t2	t3	t4	t5	t6	t7	t8	t9

2	1	1	1	1	1	2	1	1	1


At this point the set of backend candidates is all tasks except t0 and t6. However, if the request against task t4 finishes, its current state becomes "0 active requests" and a new request will be assigned to t4.
This implementation actually uses Round Robin, but it's applied across the set of tasks with minimal active requests. Without such filtering, the policy might not be able to spread the requests well enough to avoid a situation in which some portion of the available backend tasks goes unused. The idea behind the least- loaded policy is that loaded tasks will tend to have higher latency than those with spare capacity, and this strategy will naturally take load away from these loaded tasks.
All that said, we've learned (the hard way!) about one very dangerous pitfall of

the Least-Loaded Round Robin approach: if a task is seriously unhealthy, it might start serving 100% errors. Depending on the nature of those errors, they may have very low latency; it's frequently significantly faster to just return an "I'm unhealthy!" error than to actually process a request. As a result, clients might start sending a very large amount of traffic to the unhealthy task, erroneously thinking that the task is available, as opposed to fast-failing them! We say that the unhealthy task is now sinkholing traffic. Fortunately, this pitfall can be solved relatively easily by modifying the policy to count recent errors as if they were active requests. This way, if a backend task becomes unhealthy, the load balancing policy begins to divert load from it the same way it would divert load from an overburdened task.
Least-Loaded Round Robin has two important limitations:

The count of active requests may not be a very good proxy for the capability of a given backend
Many requests spend a significant portion of their life just waiting for a response from the network (i.e., waiting for responses to requests they initiate to other backends) and very little time on actual processing. For example, one backend task may be able to process twice as many requests as another (e.g., because it's running in a machine with a CPU that's twice as fast as the rest), but the latency of its requests may still be roughly the same as the latency of requests in the other task (because requests spend most of their life just waiting for the network to respond). In this case, because blocking on I/O often consumes zero CPU, very little RAM, and no bandwidth, we'd still want to send twice as many requests to the faster backend. However, Least-Loaded Round Robin will consider both backend tasks equally loaded.
The count of active requests in each client doesn't include requests from other clients to the same backends
That is, each client task has only a very limited view into the state of its backend tasks: the view of its own requests.
In practice, we've found that large services using Least-Loaded Round Robin will see their most loaded backend task using twice as much CPU as the least loaded, performing about as poorly as Round Robin.

Weighted Round Robin

Weighted Round Robin is an important load balancing policy that improves on Simple and Least-Loaded Round Robin by incorporating backend-provided information into the decision process.
Weighted Round Robin is fairly simple in principle: each client task keeps a "capability" score for each backend in its subset. Requests are distributed in Round-Robin fashion, but clients weigh the distributions of requests to backends proportionally. In each response (including responses to health checks), backends include the current observed rates of queries and errors per second, in addition to the utilization (typically, CPU usage). Clients adjust the capability scores periodically to pick backend tasks based upon their current number of successful requests handled and at what utilization cost; failed requests result in a penalty that affects future decisions.
In practice, Weighted Round Robin has worked very well and significantly reduced the difference between the most and the least utilized tasks. Figure 20-6 shows the CPU rates for a random subset of backend tasks around the time its clients switched from Least-Loaded to Weighted Round Robin. The spread from the least to the most loaded tasks decreased drastically.

Figure 20-6. CPU distribution before and after enabling Weighted Round Robin

Chapter 21 - Handling Overload
Written by Alejandro Forero Cuervo Edited by Sarah Chavis
Avoiding overload is a goal of load balancing policies. But no matter how efficient your load balancing policy, eventually some part of your system will become overloaded. Gracefully handling overload conditions is fundamental to running a reliable serving system.
One option for handling overload is to serve degraded responses: responses that are not as accurate as or that contain less data than normal responses, but that are easier to compute. For example:
Instead of searching an entire corpus to provide the best available results to a search query, search only a small percentage of the candidate set.
Rely on a local copy of results that may not be fully up to date but that will be cheaper to use than going against the canonical storage.
However, under extreme overload, the service might not even be able to compute and serve degraded responses. At this point it may have no immediate option but to serve errors. One way to mitigate this scenario is to balance traffic across datacenters such that no datacenter receives more traffic than it has the capacity to process. For example, if a datacenter runs 100 backend tasks and each task can process up to 500 requests per second, the load balancing algorithm will not allow more than 50,000 queries per second to be sent to that datacenter. However, even this constraint can prove insufficient to avoid overload when you're operating at scale. At the end of the day, it's best to build clients and backends to handle resource restrictions gracefully: redirect when possible, serve degraded results when necessary, and handle resource errors transparently when all else fails.

The Pitfalls of "Queries per Second"
Different queries can have vastly different resource requirements. A query's cost can vary based on arbitrary factors such as the code in the client that issues them

(for services that have many different clients) or even the time of the day (e.g., home users versus work users; or interactive end-user traffic versus batch traffic).
We learned this lesson the hard way: modeling capacity as "queries per second" or using static features of the requests that are believed to be a proxy for the resources they consume (e.g., "how many keys are the requests reading") often makes for a poor metric. Even if these metrics perform adequately at one point in time, the ratios can change. Sometimes the change is gradual, but sometimes the change is drastic (e.g., a new version of the software suddenly made some features of some requests require significantly fewer resources). A moving target makes a poor metric for designing and implementing load balancing.
A better solution is to measure capacity directly in available resources. For example, you may have a total of 500 CPU cores and 1 TB of memory reserved for a given service in a given datacenter. Naturally, it works much better to use those numbers directly to model a datacenter's capacity. We often speak about the cost of a request to refer to a normalized measure of how much CPU time it has consumed (over different CPU architectures, with consideration of performance differences).
In a majority of cases (although certainly not in all), we've found that simply using CPU consumption as the signal for provisioning works well, for the following reasons:
In platforms with garbage collection, memory pressure naturally translates into increased CPU consumption.
In other platforms, it's possible to provision the remaining resources in such a way that they're very unlikely to run out before CPU runs out.
In cases where over-provisioning the non-CPU resources is prohibitively expensive, we take each system resource into account separately when considering resource consumption.

Per-Customer Limits
One component of dealing with overload is deciding what to do in the case of global overload. In a perfect world, where teams coordinate their launches carefully with the owners of their backend dependencies, global overload never

happens and backend services always have enough capacity to serve their customers. Unfortunately, we don't live in a perfect world. Here in reality, global overload occurs quite frequently (especially for internal services that tend to have many clients run by many teams).
When global overload does occur, it's vital that the service only delivers error responses to misbehaving customers, while other customers remain unaffected. To achieve this outcome, service owners provision their capacity based on the negotiated usage with their customers and define per-customer quotas according to these agreements.
For example, if a backend service has 10,000 CPUs allocated worldwide (over various datacenters), their per-customer limits might look something like the following:
Gmail is allowed to consume up to 4,000 CPU seconds per second. Calendar is allowed to consume up to 4,000 CPU seconds per second. Android is allowed to consume up to 3,000 CPU seconds per second. Google+ is allowed to consume up to 2,000 CPU seconds per second. Every other user is allowed to consume up to 500 CPU seconds per second.
Note that these numbers may add up to more than the 10,000 CPUs allocated to the backend service. The service owner is relying on the fact that it's unlikely for all of their customers to hit their resource limits simultaneously.
We aggregate global usage information in real time from all backend tasks, and use that data to push effective limits to individual backend tasks. A closer look at the system that implements this logic is outside of the scope of this discussion, but we've written significant code to implement this in our backend tasks. An interesting part of the puzzle is computing in real time the amount of resources
-specifically CPU-consumed by each individual request. This computation is particularly tricky for servers that don't implement a thread-per-request model, where a pool of threads just executes different parts of all requests as they come in, using nonblocking APIs.

Client-Side Throttling
When a customer is out of quota, a backend task should reject requests quickly with the expectation that returning a "customer is out of quota" error consumes

significantly fewer resources than actually processing the request and serving back a correct response. However, this logic doesn't hold true for all services. For example, it's almost equally expensive to reject a request that requires a simple RAM lookup (where the overhead of the request/response protocol handling is significantly larger than the overhead of producing the response) as it is to accept and run that request. And even in the case where rejecting requests saves significant resources, those requests still consume some resources. If the amount of rejected requests is significant, these numbers add up quickly. In such cases, the backend can become overloaded even though the vast majority of its CPU is spent just rejecting requests!

Client-side throttling addresses this problem.106 When a client detects that a significant portion of its recent requests have been rejected due to "out of quota" errors, it starts self-regulating and caps the amount of outgoing traffic it generates. Requests above the cap fail locally without even reaching the network.
We implemented client-side throttling through a technique we call adaptive throttling. Specifically, each client task keeps the following information for the last two minutes of its history:

requests

The number of requests attempted by the application layer(at the client, on top of the adaptive throttling system)

accepts

The number of requests accepted by the backend

Under normal conditions, the two values are equal. As the backend starts rejecting traffic, the number of accepts becomes smaller than the number of requests. Clients can continue to issue requests to the backend until requests is K times as large as accepts. Once that cutoff is reached, the client begins to self-regulate and new requests are rejected locally (i.e., at the client) with the probability calculated in Client request rejection probability.

Client request rejection probability



As the client itself starts rejecting requests, requests will continue to exceed accepts. While it may seem counterintuitive, given that locally rejected requests aren't actually propagated to the backend, this is the preferred behavior. As the rate at which the application attempts requests to the client grows (relative to the rate at which the backend accepts them), we want to increase the probability of dropping new requests.
For services where the cost of processing a request is very close to the cost of rejecting that request, allowing roughly half of the backend resources to be consumed by rejected requests can be unacceptable. In this case, the solution is simple: modify the accepts multiplier K (e.g., 2) in the client request rejection probability (Client request rejection probability). In this way:
Reducing	the	multiplier	will	make	adaptive	throttling	behave	more aggressively
Increasing	the	multiplier	will	make	adaptive	throttling	behave	less aggressively
For example, instead of having the client self-regulate when requests = 2 * accepts, have it self-regulate when requests = 1.1 * accepts. Reducing the modifier to 1.1 means only one request will be rejected by the backend for every 10 requests accepted.

We generally prefer the 2x multiplier. By allowing more requests to reach the backend than are expected to actually be allowed, we waste more resources at the backend, but we also speed up the propagation of state from the backend to the clients. For example, if the backend decides to stop rejecting traffic from the client tasks, the delay until all client tasks have detected this change in state is shorter.
We've found adaptive throttling to work well in practice, leading to stable rates of requests overall. Even in large overload situations, backends end up rejecting one request for each request they actually process. One large advantage of this approach is that the decision is made by the client task based entirely on local information and using a relatively simple implementation: there are no additional dependencies or latency penalties.

One additional consideration is that client-side throttling may not work well with clients that only very sporadically send requests to their backends. In this case, the view that each client has of the state of the backend is reduced drastically, and approaches to increment this visibility tend to be expensive.

Criticality
Criticality is another notion that we've found very useful in the context of global quotas and throttling. A request made to a backend is associated with one of four possible criticality values, depending on how critical we consider that request:

CRITICAL_PLUS

Reserved for the most critical requests, those that will result in serious user- visible impact if they fail.

CRITICAL

The default value for requests sent from production jobs. These requests will result in user-visible impact, but the impact may be less severe than those of CRITICAL_PLUS. Services are expected to provision enough capacity for all expected CRITICAL and CRITICAL_PLUS traffic.

SHEDDABLE_PLUS

Traffic for which partial unavailability is expected. This is the default for batch jobs, which can retry requests minutes or even hours later.

SHEDDABLE

Traffic for which frequent partial unavailability and occasional full unavailability is expected.
We found that four values were sufficiently robust to model almost every service. We've had various discussions on proposals to add more values, because doing so would allow us to classify requests more finely. However, defining additional values would require more resources to operate various criticality- aware systems.
We've made criticality a first-class notion of our RPC system and we've worked

hard to integrate it into many of our control mechanisms so it can be taken into account when reacting to overload situations. For example:
When a customer runs out of global quota, a backend task will only reject requests of a given criticality if it's already rejecting all requests of all lower criticalities (in fact, the per-customer limits that our system supports, described earlier, can be set per criticality).
When a task is itself overloaded, it will reject requests of lower criticalities sooner.
The adaptive throttling system also keeps separate stats for each criticality.

The criticality of a request is orthogonal to its latency requirements and thus to the underlying network quality of service (QoS) used. For example, when a system displays search results or suggestions while the user is typing a search query, the underlying requests are highly sheddable (if the system is overloaded, it's acceptable to not display these results), but tend to have stringent latency requirements.
We've also significantly extended our RPC system to propagate criticality automatically. If a backend receives request A and, as part of executing that request, issues outgoing request B and request C to other backends, request B and request C will use the same criticality as request A by default.
In the past, many systems at Google had evolved their own ad hoc notions of criticality that were often incompatible across services. By standardizing and propagating criticality as a part of our RPC system, we are now able to consistently set the criticality at specific points. This means we can be confident that overloaded dependencies will abide by the desired high-level criticality as they reject traffic, regardless of how deep down the RPC stack they are. Our practice is thus to set the criticality as close as possible to the browsers or mobile clients-typically in the HTTP frontends that produce the HTML to be returned
-and only override the criticality in specific cases where it makes sense at specific points in the stack.

Utilization Signals
Our implementation of task-level overload protection is based on the notion of utilization. In many cases, the utilization is just a measurement of the CPU rate (i.e., the current CPU rate divided by the total CPUs reserved for the task), but in

some cases we also factor in measurements such as the portion of the memory reserved that is currently being used. As utilization approaches configured thresholds, we start rejecting requests based on their criticality (higher thresholds for higher criticalities).
The utilization signals we use are based on the state local to the task (since the goal of the signals is to protect the task) and we have implementations for various signals. The most generally useful signal is based on the "load" in the process, which is determined using a system we call executor load average.
To find the executor load average, we count the number of active threads in the process. In this case, "active" refers to threads that are currently running or ready to run and waiting for a free processor. We smooth this value with exponential decay and begin rejecting requests as the number of active threads grows beyond the number of processors available to the task. That means that an incoming request that has a very large fan-out (i.e., one that schedules a burst of a very large number of short-lived operations) will cause the load to spike very briefly, but the smoothing will mostly swallow that spike. However, if the operations are not short-lived (i.e., the load increases and remains high for a significant amount of time), the task will start rejecting requests.
While the executor load average has proven to be a very useful signal, our system can plug in any utilization signal that a particular backend may need. For example, we might use memory pressure-which indicates whether the memory usage in a backend task has grown beyond normal operational parameters-as another possible utilization signal. The system can also be configured to combine multiple signals and reject requests that would surpass the combined (or individual) target utilization thresholds.

Handling Overload Errors
In addition to handling load gracefully, we've put a significant amount of thought into how clients should react when they receive a load-related error response. In the case of overload errors, we distinguish between two possible situations.
A large subset of backend tasks in the datacenter are overloaded.

If the cross-datacenter load balancing system is working perfectly (i.e., it

can propagate state and react instantaneously to shifts in traffic), this condition will not occur.
A small subset of backend tasks in the datacenter are overloaded.

This situation is typically caused by imperfections in the load balancing inside the datacenter. For example, a task may have very recently received a very expensive request. In this case, it is very likely that the datacenter has remaining capacity in other tasks to handle the request.
If a large subset of backend tasks in the datacenter are overloaded, requests should not be retried and errors should bubble up all the way to the caller (e.g., returning an error to the end user). It's much more typical that only a small portion of tasks become overloaded, in which case the preferred response is to retry the request immediately. In general, our cross-datacenter load balancing system tries to direct traffic from clients to their nearest available backend datacenters. In a few cases, the nearest datacenter is far away (e.g., a client may have its nearest available backend in a different continent), but we usually manage to situate clients close to their backends. That way, the additional latency of retrying a request-just a few network round trips-tends to be negligible.
From the point of view of our load balancing policies, retries of requests are indistinguishable from new requests. That is, we don't use any explicit logic to ensure that a retry actually goes to a different backend task; we just rely on the likely probability that the retry will land on a different backend task simply by virtue of the number of participating backends in the subset. Ensuring that all retries actually go to a different task would incur more complexity in our APIs than is worthwhile.
Even if a backend is only slightly overloaded, a client request is often better served if the backend rejects retry and new requests equally and quickly. These requests can then be retried immediately on a different backend task that may have spare resources. The consequence of treating retries and new requests identically at the backend is that retrying requests in different tasks becomes a form of organic load balancing: it redirects load to tasks that may be better suited for those requests.

Deciding to Retry

When a client receives a "task overloaded" error response, it needs to decide whether to retry the request. We have a few mechanisms in place to avoid retries when a significant portion of the tasks in a cluster are overloaded.
First, we implement a per-request retry budget of up to three attempts. If a request has already failed three times, we let the failure bubble up to the caller. The rationale is that if a request has already landed on overloaded tasks three times, it's relatively unlikely that attempting it again will help because the whole datacenter is likely overloaded.
Secondly, we implement a per-client retry budget. Each client keeps track of the ratio of requests that correspond to retries. A request will only be retried as long as this ratio is below 10%. The rationale is that if only a small subset of tasks are overloaded, there will be relatively little need to retry.
As a concrete example (of the worst-case scenario), let's assume a datacenter is accepting a small amount of requests and rejecting a large portion of requests. Let X be the total rate of requests attempted against the datacenter according to the client-side logic. Due to the number of retries that will occur, the number of requests will grow significantly, to somewhere just below 3X. Although we've effectively capped the growth caused by retries, a threefold increase in requests is significant, especially if the cost of rejecting versus processing a request is considerable. However, layering on the per-client retry budget (a 10% retry ratio) reduces the growth to just 1.1x in the general case-a significant improvement.
A third approach has clients include a counter of how many times the request has already been tried in the request metadata. For instance, the counter starts at 0 in the first attempt and is incremented on every retry until it reaches 2, at which point the per-request budget causes it to stop being retried. Backends keep histograms of these values in recent history. When a backend needs to reject a request, it consults these histograms to determine the likelihood that other backend tasks are also overloaded. If these histograms reveal a significant amount of retries (indicating that other backend tasks are likely also overloaded), they return an "overloaded; don't retry" error response instead of the standard "task overloaded" error that triggers retries.
Figure 21-1 shows the number of attempts in each request received by a given backend  task  in  various  example  situations,  over  a  sliding  window

(corresponding to 1,000 initial requests, not counting retries). For simplicity, the per-client retry budget is ignored (i.e., these numbers assume that the only limit to retries is the retry budget of three attempts per request), and subsetting could alter these numbers somewhat.

Figure 21-1. Histograms of attempts in various conditions

Our larger services tend to be deep stacks of systems, which may in turn have dependencies on each other. In this architecture, requests should only be retried at the layer immediately above the layer that is rejecting them. When we decide that a given request can't be served and shouldn't be retried, we use an "overloaded; don't retry" error and thus avoid a combinatorial retry explosion.
Consider the example from Figure 21-2 (in practice, our stacks are often significantly more complex). Imagine that the DB Frontend is currently overloaded and rejects a request. In that case:
Backend B will then retry the request according to the preceding guidelines. However, once Backend B determines that the request to the DB Frontend can't be served (for example, because the request has already been attempted and rejected three times), Backend B has to return to Backend A either an "overloaded; don't retry" error or a degraded response (assuming that it can produce some moderately useful response even when its request

to the DB Frontend failed).
Backend A has exactly the same options for the request it received from the Frontend, and proceeds accordingly.


Figure 21-2. A stack of dependencies

The key point is that a failed request from the DB Frontend should only be retried by Backend B, the layer immediately above it. If multiple layers retried, we'd have a combinatorial explosion.

Load from Connections
The load associated with connections is one last factor worth mentioning. We sometimes only take into account load at the backends that is caused directly by the requests they receive (which is one of the problems with approaches that model load based upon queries per second). However, doing so overlooks the CPU and memory costs of maintaining a large pool of connections or the cost of a fast rate of churn of connections. Such issues are negligible in small systems, but quickly become problematic when running very large-scale RPC systems.
As mentioned previously, our RPC protocol requires inactive clients to perform periodic health checks. After a connection has been idle for a configurable amount of time, the client drops its TCP connection and switches to UDP for health checking. Unfortunately, this behavior is problematic when you have a very large number of client tasks that issue a very low rate of requests: health checking on the connections can require more resources than actually serving the requests. Approaches such as carefully tuning the connection parameters (e.g., significantly decreasing the frequency of health checks) or even creating and destroying the connections dynamically can significantly improve this situation.
Handling bursts of new connection requests is a second (but related) problem. We've seen bursts of this type happen in the case of very large batch jobs that create a very large number of worker client tasks all at once. The need to negotiate and maintain an excessive number of new connections simultaneously can easily overload a group of backends. In our experience, there are a couple strategies that can help mitigate this load:
Expose the load to the cross-datacenter load balancing algorithm (e.g., base load balancing on the utilization of the cluster, rather than just on the number of requests). In this case, load from requests is effectively rebalanced away to other datacenters that have spare capacity.
Mandate that batch client jobs use a separate set of batch proxy backend tasks that do nothing but forward requests to the underlying backends and hand their responses back to the clients in a controlled way. Therefore, instead of "batch client ? backend," you have "batch client ? batch proxy

? backend." In this case, when the very large job starts, only the batch proxy job suffers, shielding the actual backends (and higher-priority clients). Effectively, the batch proxy acts like a fuse. Another advantage of using the proxy is that it typically reduces the number of connections against the backend, which can improve the load balancing against the backend (e.g., the proxy tasks can use bigger subsets and probably have a better view of the state of the backend tasks).

Conclusions
This chapter and Load Balancing in the Datacenter have discussed how various techniques (deterministic subsetting, Weighted Round Robin, client-side throttling, customer quotas, etc.) can help to spread load over tasks in a datacenter relatively evenly. However, these mechanisms depend on the propagation of state over a distributed system. While they perform reasonably well in the general case, real-world application has resulted in a small number of situations where they work imperfectly.
As a result, we consider it critical to ensure that individual tasks are protected against overload. To state this simply: a backend task provisioned to serve a certain traffic rate should continue to serve traffic at that rate without any significant impact on latency, regardless of how much excess traffic is thrown at the task. As a corollary, the backend task should not fall over and crash under the load. These statements should hold true up to a certain rate of traffic- somewhere above 2x or even 10x what the task is provisioned to process. We accept that there might be a certain point at which a system begins to break down, and raising the threshold at which this breakdown occurs becomes relatively difficult to achieve.
The key is to take these degradation conditions seriously. When these degradation conditions are ignored, many systems will exhibit terrible behavior. And as work piles up and tasks eventually run out of memory and crash (or end up burning almost all their CPU in memory thrashing), latency suffers as traffic is dropped and tasks compete for resources. Left unchecked, the failure in a subset of a system (such as an individual backend task) might trigger the failure of other system components, potentially causing the entire system (or a considerable subset) to fail. The impact from this kind of cascading failure can be so severe that it's critical for any system operating at scale to protect against

it; see Addressing Cascading Failures.

It's a common mistake to assume that an overloaded backend should turn down and stop accepting all traffic. However, this assumption actually goes counter to the goal of robust load balancing. We actually want the backend to continue accepting as much traffic as possible, but to only accept that load as capacity frees up. A well-behaved backend, supported by robust load balancing policies, should accept only the requests that it can process and reject the rest gracefully.
While we have a vast array of tools to implement good load balancing and overload protections, there is no magic bullet: load balancing often requires deep understanding of a system and the semantics of its requests. The techniques described in this chapter have evolved along with the needs of many systems at Google, and will likely continue to evolve as the nature of our systems continues to change.

106For example, see Doorman, which provides a cooperative distributed client- side throttling system.

Chapter 22 - Addressing Cascading Failures
Written by Mike Ulrich

If at first you don't succeed, back off exponentially. Dan Sandler, Google Software Engineer
Why do people always forget that you need to add a little jitter? Ade Oshineye, Google Developer Advocate
A cascading failure is a failure that grows over time as a result of positive feedback.107 It can occur when a portion of an overall system fails, increasing the probability that other portions of the system fail. For example, a single replica for a service can fail due to overload, increasing load on remaining
replicas and increasing their probability of failing, causing a domino effect that takes down all the replicas for a service.
We'll use the Shakespeare search service discussed in Shakespeare: A Sample Service as an example throughout this chapter. Its production configuration might look something like Figure 22-1.



Figure 22-1. Example production configuration for the Shakespeare search service

Causes of Cascading Failures and Designing to Avoid Them
Well-thought-out system design should take into account a few typical scenarios that account for the majority of cascading failures.

Server Overload

The most common cause of cascading failures is overload. Most cascading

failures described here are either directly due to server overload, or due to extensions or variations of this scenario.
Suppose the frontend in cluster A is handling 1,000 requests per second (QPS), as in Figure 22-2.


Figure 22-2. Normal server load distribution between clusters A and B

If cluster B fails (Figure 22-3), requests to cluster A increase to 1,200 QPS. The frontends in A are not able to handle requests at 1,200 QPS, and therefore start running out of resources, which causes them to crash, miss deadlines, or otherwise misbehave. As a result, the rate of successfully handled requests in A dips well below 1,000 QPS.



Figure 22-3. Cluster B fails, sending all traffic to cluster A

This reduction in the rate of useful work being done can spread into other failure domains, potentially spreading globally. For example, local overload in one cluster may lead to its servers crashing; in response, the load balancing controller sends requests to other clusters, overloading their servers, leading to a service-wide overload failure. It may not take long for these events to transpire (e.g., on the order of a couple minutes), because the load balancer and task scheduling systems involved may act very quickly.

Resource Exhaustion

Running out of a resource can result in higher latency, elevated error rates, or the substitution of lower-quality results. These are in fact desired effects of running out of resources: something eventually needs to give as the load increases beyond what a server can handle.
Depending on what resource becomes exhausted in a server and how the server is built, resource exhaustion can render the server less efficient or cause the server to crash, prompting the load balancer to distribute the resource problems to other servers. When this happens, the rate of successfully handled requests can drop and possibly send the cluster or an entire service into a cascade failure.

Different types of resources can be exhausted, resulting in varying effects on servers.

CPU

If there is insufficient CPU to handle the request load, typically all requests become slower. This scenario can result in various secondary effects, including the following:
Increased number of in-flight requests

Because requests take longer to handle, more requests are handled concurrently (up to a possible maximum capacity at which queuing may occur). This affects almost all resources, including memory, number of active threads (in a thread-per-request server model), number of file descriptors, and backend resources (which in turn can have other effects).
Excessively long queue lengths

If there is insufficient capacity to handle all the requests at steady state, the server will saturate its queues. This means that latency increases (the requests are queued for longer amounts of time) and the queue uses more memory. See Queue Management for a discussion of mitigation strategies.
Thread starvation

When a thread can't make progress because it's waiting for a lock, health checks may fail if the health check endpoint can't be served in time.
CPU or request starvation

Internal watchdogs108 in the server detect that the server isn't making progress, causing the servers to crash due to CPU starvation, or due to request starvation if watchdog events are triggered remotely and processed as part of the request queue.
Missed RPC deadlines

As a server becomes overloaded, its responses to RPCs from its clients

arrive later, which may exceed any deadlines those clients set. The work the server did to respond is then wasted, and clients may retry the RPCs, leading to even more overload.
Reduced CPU caching benefits

As more CPU is used, the chance of spilling on to more cores increases, resulting in decreased usage of local caches and decreased CPU efficiency.

Memory

If nothing else, more in-flight requests consume more RAM from allocating the request, response, and RPC objects. Memory exhaustion can cause the following effects:
Dying tasks

For example, a task might be evicted by the container manager (VM or otherwise) for exceeding available resource limits, or application-specific crashes may cause tasks to die.
Increased rate of garbage collection (GC) in Java, resulting in increased CPU usage
A vicious cycle can occur in this scenario:less CPU is available, resulting in slower requests, resulting in increased RAM usage, resulting in more GC, resulting in even lower availability of CPU.This is known colloquially as the "GC death spiral."
Reduction in cache hit rates

Reduction in available RAM can reduce application-level cache hit rates, resulting in more RPCs to the backends, which can possibly cause the backends to become overloaded.

Threads

Thread starvation can directly cause errors or lead to health check failures. If the server adds threads as needed, thread overhead can use too much RAM. In

extreme cases, thread starvation can also cause you to run out of process IDs.

File descriptors

Running out of file descriptors can lead to the inability to initialize network connections, which in turn can cause health checks to fail.

Dependencies among resources

Note that many of these resource exhaustion scenarios feed from one another-a service experiencing overload often has a host of secondary symptoms that can look like the root cause, making debugging difficult.
For example, imagine the following scenario:

1. A Java frontend has poorly tuned garbage collection (GC) parameters.
2. Under high (but expected) load, the frontend runs out of CPU due to GC.
3. CPU exhaustion slows down completion of requests.
4. The increased number of in-progress requests causes more RAM to be used to process the requests.
5. Memory pressure due to requests, in combination with a fixed memory allocation for the frontend process as a whole, leaves less RAM available for caching.
6. The reduced cache size means fewer entries in the cache, in addition to a lower hit rate.
7. The increase in cache misses means that more requests fall through to the backend for servicing.
8. The backend, in turn, runs out of CPU or threads.
9. Finally, the lack of CPU causes basic health checks to fail, starting a cascading failure.
In situations as complex as the preceding scenario, it's unlikely that the causal chain will be fully diagnosed during an outage. It might be very hard to determine that the backend crash was caused by a decrease in the cache rate in the frontend, particularly if the frontend and backend components have different owners.

Service Unavailability

Resource exhaustion can lead to servers crashing; for example, servers might crash when too much RAM is allocated to a container. Once a couple of servers crash on overload, the load on the remaining servers can increase, causing them to crash as well. The problem tends to snowball and soon all servers begin to crash-loop. It's often difficult to escape this scenario because as soon as servers come back online they're bombarded with an extremely high rate of requests and fail almost immediately.
For example, if a service was healthy at 10,000 QPS, but started a cascading failure due to crashes at 11,000 QPS, dropping the load to 9,000 QPS will almost certainly not stop the crashes. This is because the service will be handling increased demand with reduced capacity; only a small fraction of servers will usually be healthy enough to handle requests. The fraction of servers that will be healthy depends on a few factors: how quickly the system is able to start the tasks, how quickly the binary can start serving at full capacity, and how long a freshly started task is able to survive the load. In this example, if 10% of the servers are healthy enough to handle requests, the request rate would need to drop to about 1,000 QPS in order for the system to stabilize and recover.
Similarly, servers can appear unhealthy to the load balancing layer, resulting in reduced load balancing capacity: servers may go into "lame duck" state (see A Robust Approach to Unhealthy Tasks: Lame Duck State) or fail health checks without crashing. The effect can be very similar to crashing: more servers appear unhealthy, the healthy servers tend to accept requests for a very brief period of time before becoming unhealthy, and fewer servers participate in handling requests.
Load balancing policies that avoid servers that have served errors can exacerbate problems further-a few backends serve some errors, so they don't contribute to the available capacity for the service. This increases the load on the remaining servers, starting the snowball effect.

Preventing Server Overload
The following list presents strategies for avoiding server overload in rough priority order:
Load test the server's capacity limits, and test the failure mode for overload

This is the most important exercise you should conduct in order to prevent server overload. Unless you test in a realistic environment, it's very hard to predict exactly which resource will be exhausted and how that resource exhaustion will manifest. For details, see Testing for Cascading Failures.
Serve degraded results

Serve lower-quality, cheaper-to-compute results to the user. Your strategy here will be service-specific.See Load Shedding and Graceful Degradation.
Instrument the server to reject requests when overloaded

Servers should protect themselves from becoming overloaded and crashing.When overloaded at either the frontend or backend layers, fail early and cheaply. For details, see Load Shedding and Graceful Degradation.
Instrument higher-level systems to reject requests, rather than overloading servers
Note that because rate limiting often doesn't take overall service health into account, it may not be able to stop a failure that has already begun.Simple rate-limiting implementations are also likely to leave capacity unused. Rate limiting can be implemented in a number of places:
At the reverse proxies, by limiting the volume of requests by criteria such as IP address to mitigate attempted denial-of-service attacks and abusive clients.
At the load balancers, by dropping requests when the service enters global overload. Depending on the nature and complexity of the service, this rate limiting can be indiscriminate ("drop all traffic above X requests per second") or more selective ("drop requests that aren't from users who have recently interacted with the service" or "drop requests for low-priority operations like background synchronization, but keep serving interactive user sessions").
At individual tasks, to prevent random fluctuations in load balancing from overwhelming the server.
Perform capacity planning

Good capacity planning can reduce the probability that a cascading failure

will occur.Capacity planning should be coupled with performance testing to determine the load at which the service will fail.For instance, if every cluster's breaking point is 5,000 QPS, the load is evenly spread across clusters,109 and the service's peak load is 19,000 QPS, then approximately
six clusters are needed to run the service at N + 2.

Capacity planning reduces the probability of triggering a cascading failure, but it is not sufficient to protect the service from cascading failures. When you lose major parts of your infrastructure during a planned or unplanned event, no amount of capacity planning may be sufficient to prevent cascading failures. Load balancing problems, network partitions, or unexpected traffic increases can create pockets of high load beyond what was planned. Some systems can grow the number of tasks for your service on demand, which may prevent overload; however, proper capacity planning is still needed.

Queue Management

Most thread-per-request servers use a queue in front of a thread pool to handle requests.Requests come in, they sit on a queue, and then threads pick requests off the queue and perform the actual work (whatever actions are required by the server). Usually, if the queue is full, the server will reject new requests.
If the request rate and latency of a given task is constant, there is no reason to queue requests: a constant number of threads should be occupied. Under this idealized scenario, requests will only be queued if the steady state rate of incoming requests exceeds the rate at which the server can process requests, which results in saturation of both the thread pool and the queue.
Queued requests consume memory and increase latency. For example, if the queue size is 10x the number of threads, the time to handle the request on a thread is 100 milliseconds. If the queue is full, then a request will take 1.1 seconds to handle, most of which time is spent on the queue.
For a system with fairly steady traffic over time, it is usually better to have small queue lengths relative to the thread pool size (e.g., 50% or less), which results in the server rejecting requests early when it can't sustain the rate of incoming requests. For example, Gmail often uses queueless servers, relying instead on failover to other server tasks when the threads are full. On the other end of the spectrum, systems with "bursty" load for which traffic patterns fluctuate

drastically may do better with a queue size based on the current number of threads in use, processing time for each request, and the size and frequency of bursts.

Load Shedding and Graceful Degradation

Load shedding drops some proportion of load by dropping traffic as the server approaches overload conditions. The goal is to keep the server from running out of RAM, failing health checks, serving with extremely high latency, or any of the other symptoms associated with overload, while still doing as much useful work as it can.
One straightforward way to shed load is to do per-task throttling based on CPU, memory, or queue length; limiting queue length as discussed in Queue Management is a form of this strategy. For example, one effective approach is to return an HTTP 503 (service unavailable) to any incoming request when there are more than a given number of client requests in flight.
Changing the queuing method from the standard first-in, first-out (FIFO) to last- in, first-out (LIFO) or using the controlled delay (CoDel) algorithm [Nic12] or similar approaches can reduce load by removing requests that are unlikely to be worth processing [Mau15]. If a user's web search is slow because an RPC has been queued for 10 seconds, there's a good chance the user has given up and refreshed their browser, issuing another request: there's no point in responding to the first one, since it will be ignored! This strategy works well when combined with propagating RPC deadlines throughout the stack, described in Latency and Deadlines.
More sophisticated approaches include identifying clients to be more selective about what work is dropped, or picking requests that are more important and prioritizing.Such strategies are more likely to be needed for shared services.
Graceful degradation takes the concept of load shedding one step further by reducing the amount of work that needs to be performed. In some applications, it's possible to significantly decrease the amount of work or time needed by decreasing the quality of responses. For instance, a search application might only search a subset of data stored in an in-memory cache rather than the full on-disk database or use a less-accurate (but faster) ranking algorithm when overloaded.

When evaluating load shedding or graceful degradation options for your service, consider the following:
Which metrics should you use to determine when load shedding or graceful degradation should kick in (e.g,. CPU usage, latency, queue length, number of threads used, whether your service enters degraded mode automatically or if manual intervention is necessary)?
What actions should be taken when the server is in degraded mode?
At what layer should load shedding and graceful degradation be implemented? Does it make sense to implement these strategies at every layer in the stack, or is it sufficient to have a high-level choke-point?
As you evaluate options and deploy, keep the following in mind:

Graceful degradation shouldn't trigger very often-usually in cases of a capacity planning failure or unexpected load shift. Keep the system simple and understandable, particularly if it isn't used often.
Remember that the code path you never use is the code path that (often) doesn't work. In steady-state operation, graceful degradation mode won't be used, implying that you'll have much less operational experience with this mode and any of its quirks, which increases the level of risk. You can make sure that graceful degradation stays working by regularly running a small subset of servers near overload in order to exercise this code path.
Monitor and alert when too many servers enter these modes.
Complex load shedding and graceful degradation can cause problems themselves-excessive complexity may cause the server to trip into a degraded mode when it is not desired, or enter feedback cycles at undesired times. Design a way to quickly turn off complex graceful degradation or tune parameters if needed. Storing this configuration in a consistent system that each server can watch for changes, such as Chubby, can increase deployment speed, but also introduces its own risks of synchronized failure.

Retries

Suppose the code in the frontend that talks to the backend implements retries naively.It retries after encountering a failure and caps the number of backend RPCs per logical request to 10.Consider this code in the frontend, using gRPC in Go:

func exampleRpcCall(client pb.ExampleClient, request pb.Request) *pb
// Set RPC timeout to 5 seconds.
opts := grpc.WithTimeout(5 * time.Second)

// Try up to 10 times to make the RPC call. attempts := 10
for attempts > 0 {
conn, err := grpc.Dial(*serverAddr, opts...) if err != nil {
// Something went wrong in setting up the connection. Tr attempts--
continue
}
defer conn.Close()

// Create a client stub and make the RPC call. client := pb.NewBackendClient(conn)
response, err := client.MakeRequest(context.Background, requ if err != nil {
// Something went wrong in making the call. Try again. attempts--
continue
}

return response
}

grpclog.Fatalf("ran out of attempts")
}

This system can cascade in the following way:

1. Assume our backend has a known limit of 10,000 QPS per task, after which point all further requests are rejected in an attempt at graceful degradation.
2. The frontend calls MakeRequest at a constant rate of 10,100 QPS and overloads the backend by 100 QPS, which the backend rejects.
3. Those 100 failed QPS are retried in MakeRequest every 1,000 ms, and probably succeed. But the retries are themselves adding to the requests sent to the backend, which now receives 10,200 QPS-200 QPS of which are failing due to overload.
4. The volume of retries grows: 100 QPS of retries in the first second leads to 200 QPS, then to 300 QPS, and so on. Fewer and fewer requests are able to succeed on their first attempt, so less useful work is being performed as a fraction of requests to the backend.

5. If the backend task is unable to handle the increase in load-which is consuming file descriptors, memory, and CPU time on the backend-it can melt down and crash under the sheer load of requests and retries. This crash then redistributes the requests it was receiving across the remaining backend tasks, in turn further overloading those tasks.

Some simplifying assumptions were made here to illustrate this scenario,110 but the point remains that retries can destabilize a system. Note that both temporary load spikes and slow increases in usage can cause this effect.
Even if the rate of calls to MakeRequest decreases to pre-meltdown levels (9,000 QPS, for example), depending on how much returning a failure costs the backend, the problem might not go away. Two factors are at play here:

If the backend spends a significant amount of resources processing requests that will ultimately fail due to overload, then the retries themselves may be keeping the backend in an overloaded mode.
The backend servers themselves may not be stable. Retries can amplify the effects seen in Server Overload.
If either of these conditions is true, in order to dig out of this outage, you must dramatically reduce or eliminate the load on the frontends until the retries stop and the backends stabilize.
This pattern has contributed to several cascading failures, whether the frontends and backends communicate via RPC messages, the "frontend" is client JavaScript code issuing XmlHttpRequest calls to an endpoint and retries on failure, or the retries originate from an offline sync protocol that retries aggressively when it encounters a failure.

When issuing automatic retries, keep in mind the following considerations:

Most of the backend protection strategies described in Preventing Server Overload apply. In particular, testing the system can highlight problems, and graceful degradation can reduce the effect of the retries on the backend. Always use randomized exponential backoff when scheduling retries. See also "Exponential Backoff and Jitter" in the AWS Architecture Blog [Bro15]. If retries aren't randomly distributed over the retry window, a small perturbation (e.g., a network blip) can cause retry ripples to schedule

at the same time, which can then amplify themselves [Flo94]. Limit retries per request. Don't retry a given request indefinitely.
Consider having a server-wide retry budget. For example, only allow 60 retries per minute in a process, and if the retry budget is exceeded, don't retry; just fail the request. This strategy can contain the retry effect and be the difference between a capacity planning failure that leads to some dropped queries and a global cascading failure.
Think about the service holistically and decide if you really need to perform retries at a given level. In particular, avoid amplifying retries by issuing retries at multiple levels: a single request at the highest layer may produce a number of attempts as large as the product of the number of attempts at each layer to the lowest layer. If the database can't service requests because it's overloaded, and the backend, frontend, and JavaScript layers all issue 3 retries (4 attempts), then a single user action may create 64 attempts (4^3) on the database.This behavior is undesirable when the database is returning those errors because it's overloaded.
Use clear response codes and consider how different failure modes should be handled. For example, separate retriable and nonretriable error conditions. Don't retry permanent errors or malformed requests in a client, because neither will ever succeed. Return a specific status when overloaded so that clients and other layers back off and do not retry.
In an emergency, it may not be obvious that an outage is due to bad retry behavior. Graphs of retry rates can be an indication of bad retry behavior, but may be confused as a symptom instead of a compounding cause. In terms of mitigation, this is a special case of the insufficient capacity problem, with the additional caveat that you must either fix the retry behavior (usually requiring a code push), reduce load significantly, or cut requests off entirely.

Latency and Deadlines

When a frontend sends an RPC to a backend server, the frontend consumes resources waiting for a reply. RPC deadlines define how long a request can wait before the frontend gives up, limiting the time that the backend may consume the frontend's resources.

Picking a deadline

It's usually wise to set a deadline. Setting either no deadline or an extremely high deadline may cause short-term problems that have long since passed to continue to consume server resources until the server restarts.
High deadlines can result in resource consumption in higher levels of the stack when lower levels of the stack are having problems. Short deadlines can cause some more expensive requests to fail consistently. Balancing these constraints to pick a good deadline can be something of an art.

Missing deadlines

A common theme in many cascading outages is that servers spend resources handling requests that will exceed their deadlines on the client. As a result, resources are spent while no progress is made: you don't get credit for late assignments with RPCs.
Suppose an RPC has a 10-second deadline, as set by the client.The server is very overloaded, and as a result, it takes 11 seconds to move from a queue to a thread pool. At this point, the client has already given up on the request. Under most circumstances, it would be unwise for the server to attempt to handle this request, because it would be doing work for which no credit will be granted-the client doesn't care what work the server does after the deadline has passed, because it's given up on the request already.
If handling a request is performed over multiple stages (e.g., there are a few callbacks and RPC calls), the server should check the deadline left at each stage before attempting to perform any more work on the request. For example, if a request is split into parsing, backend request, and processing stages, it may make sense to check that there is enough time left to handle the request before each stage.

Deadline propagation

Rather than inventing a deadline when sending RPCs to backends, servers should employ deadline propagation.
With deadline propagation, a deadline is set high in the stack (e.g., in the frontend). The tree of RPCs emanating from an initial request will all have the same absolute deadline. For example, if server A selects a 30-second deadline,

and processes the request for 7 seconds before sending an RPC to server B, the RPC from A to B will have a 23-second deadline. If server B takes 4 seconds to handle the request and sends an RPC to server C, the RPC from B to C will have a 19-second deadline, and so on. Ideally, each server in the request tree implements deadline propagation.
Without deadline propagation, the following scenario may occur:

1. Server A sends an RPC to server B with a 10-second deadline.
2. Server B takes 8 seconds to start processing the request and then sends an RPC to server C.
3. If server B uses deadline propagation, it should set a 2-second deadline, but suppose it instead uses a hardcoded 20-second deadline for the RPC to server C.
4. Server C pulls the request off its queue after 5 seconds.

Had server B used deadline propagation, server C could immediately give up on the request because the 2-second deadline was exceeded. However, in this scenario, server C processes the request thinking it has 15 seconds to spare, but is not doing useful work, since the request from server A to server B has already exceeded its deadline.
You may want to reduce the outgoing deadline a bit (e.g., a few hundred milliseconds) to account for network transit times and post-processing in the client.
Also consider setting an upper bound for outgoing deadlines. You may want to limit how long the server waits for outgoing RPCs to noncritical backends, or for RPCs to backends that typically complete in a short duration. However, be sure to understand your traffic mix, because you might otherwise inadvertently make particular types of requests fail all the time (e.g., requests with large payloads, or requests that require responding to a lot of computation).
There are some exceptions for which servers may wish to continue processing a request after the deadline has elapsed. For example, if a server receives a request that involves performing some expensive catchup operation and periodically checkpoints the progress of the catchup, it would be a good idea to check the deadline only after writing the checkpoint, instead of after the expensive operation.

Cancellation propagation

Propagating cancellations reduces unneeded or doomed work by advising servers in an RPC call stack that their efforts are no longer necessary. To reduce latency, some systems use "hedged requests" [Dea13] to send RPCs to a primary server, then some time later, send the same request to other instances of the same service in case the primary is slow in responding; once the client has received a response from any server, it sends messages to the other servers to cancel the now-superfluous requests. Those requests may themselves transitively fan out to many other servers, so cancellations should be propagated throughout the entire stack.
This approach can also be used to avoid the potential leakage that occurs if an initial RPC has a long deadline, but subsequent critical RPCs between deeper layers of the stack receive errors which can't succeed on retry, or have short deadlines and time out. Using only simple deadline propagation, the initial call continues to use server resources until it eventually times out, despite being doomed to failure. Sending fatal errors or timeouts up the stack and cancelling other RPCs in the call tree prevents unneeded work if the request as a whole can't be fulfilled.

Bimodal latency

Suppose that the frontend from the preceding example consists of 10 servers, each with 100 worker threads. This means that the frontend has a total of 1,000 threads of capacity.During usual operation, the frontends perform 1,000 QPS and requests complete in 100 ms. This means that the frontends usually have 100 worker threads occupied out of the 1,000 configured worker threads (1,000 QPS
* 0.1 seconds).

Suppose an event causes 5% of the requests to never complete.This could be the result of the unavailability of some Bigtable row ranges, which renders the requests corresponding to that Bigtable keyspace unservable. As a result, 5% of the requests hit the deadline, while the remaining 95% of the requests take the usual 100 ms.
With a 100-second deadline, 5% of requests would consume 5,000 threads (50 QPS * 100 seconds), but the frontend doesn't have that many threads available. Assuming no other secondary effects, the frontend will only be able to handle

19.6% of the requests (1,000 threads available / (5,000 + 95) threads' worth of work), resulting in an 80.4% error rate.
Therefore, instead of only 5% of requests receiving an error (those that didn't complete due to keyspace unavailability), most requests receive an error.
The following guidelines can help address this class of problems:

Detecting this problem can be very hard. In particular, it may not be clear that bimodal latency is the cause of an outage when you are looking at mean latency. When you see a latency increase, try to look at the distribution of latencies in addition to the averages.
This problem can be avoided if the requests that don't complete return with an error early, rather than waiting the full deadline. For example, if a backend is unavailable, it's usually best to immediately return an error for that backend, rather than consuming resources until the backend is available. If your RPC layer supports a fail-fast option, use it.
Having deadlines several orders of magnitude longer than the mean request latency is usually bad. In the preceding example, a small number of requests initially hit the deadline, but the deadline was three orders of magnitude larger than the normal mean latency, leading to thread exhaustion.
When using shared resources that can be exhausted by some keyspace, consider either limiting in-flight requests by that keyspace or using other kinds of abuse tracking. Suppose your backend processes requests for different clients that have wildly different performance and request characteristics. You might consider only allowing 25% of your threads to be occupied by any one client in order to provide fairness in the face of heavy load by any single client misbehaving.

Slow Startup and Cold Caching
Processes are often slower at responding to requests immediately after starting than they will be in steady state. This slowness can be caused by either or both of the following:
Required initialization

Setting up connections upon receiving the first request that needs a given

backend

Runtime performance improvements in some languages, particularly Java

Just-In-Time compilation, hotspot optimization, and deferred class loading

Similarly, some binaries are less efficient when caches aren't filled. For example, in the case of some of Google's services, most requests are served out of caches, so requests that miss the cache are significantly more expensive. In steady-state operation with a warm cache, only a few cache misses occur, but when the cache is completely empty, 100% of requests are costly. Other services might employ caches to keep a user's state in RAM. This might be accomplished through hard or soft stickiness between reverse proxies and service frontends.
If the service is not provisioned to handle requests under a cold cache, it's at greater risk of outages and should take steps to avoid them.
The following scenarios can lead to a cold cache:

Turning up a new cluster

A recently added cluster will have an empty cache.

Returning a cluster to service after maintenance The cache may be stale.
Restarts

If a task with a cache has recently restarted, filling its cache will take some time. It may be worthwhile to move caching from a server to a separate binary like memcache, which also allows cache sharing between many servers, albeit at the cost of introducing another RPC and slight additional latency.

If caching has a significant effect on the service,111 you may want to use one or some of the following strategies:
Overprovision the service. It's important to note the distinction between a latency cache versus a capacity cache: when a latency cache is employed,

the service can sustain its expected load with an empty cache, but a service using a capacity cache cannot sustain its expected load under an empty cache. Service owners should be vigilant about adding caches to their service, and make sure that any new caches are either latency caches or are sufficiently well engineered to safely function as capacity caches. Sometimes caches are added to a service to improve performance, but actually wind up being hard dependencies.
Employ general cascading failure prevention techniques.In particular, servers should reject requests when they're overloaded or enter degraded modes, and testing should be performed to see how the service behaves after events such as a large restart.
When adding load to a cluster, slowly increase the load. The initially small request rate warms up the cache; once the cache is warm, more traffic can be added. It's a good idea to ensure that all clusters carry nominal load and that the caches are kept warm.

Always Go Downward in the Stack

In the example Shakespeare service, the frontend talks to a backend, which in turn talks to the storage layer. A problem that manifests in the storage layer can cause problems for servers that talk to it, but fixing the storage layer will usually repair both the backend and frontend layers.
However, suppose the backends cross-communicate amongst each other. For example, the backends might proxy requests to one another to change who owns a user when the storage layer can't service a request. This intra-layer communication can be problematic for several reasons:
The communication is susceptible to a distributed deadlock. Backends may use the same thread pool to wait on RPCs sent to remote backends that are simultaneously receiving requests from remote backends. Suppose backend A's thread pool is full. Backend B sends a request to backend A and uses a thread in backend B until backend A's thread pool clears. This behavior can cause the thread pool saturation to spread.
If intra-layer communication increases in response to some kind of failure or heavy load condition (e.g., load rebalancing that is more active under high load), intra-layer communication can quickly switch from a low to high intra-layer request mode when the load increases enough.

For example, suppose a user has a primary backend and a predetermined hot standby secondary backend in a different cluster that can take over the user. The primary backend proxies requests to the secondary backend as a result of errors from the lower layer or in response to heavy load on the master. If the entire system is overloaded, primary to secondary proxying will likely increase and add even more load to the system, due to the additional cost of parsing and waiting on the request to the secondary in the primary.
Depending on the criticality of the cross-layer communication, bootstrapping the system may become more complex.
It's usually better to avoid intra-layer communication-i.e., possible cycles in the communication path-in the user request path. Instead, have the client do the communication. For example, if a frontend talks to a backend but guesses the wrong backend, the backend should not proxy to the correct backend. Instead, the backend should tell the frontend to retry its request on the correct backend.

Triggering Conditions for Cascading Failures
When a service is susceptible to cascading failures, there are several possible disturbances that can initiate the domino effect. This section identifies some of the factors that trigger cascading failures.

Process Death

Some server tasks may die, reducing the amount of available capacity. Tasks might die because of a Query of Death (an RPC whose contents trigger a failure in the process), cluster issues, assertion failures, or a number of other reasons. A very small event (e.g., a couple of crashes or tasks rescheduled to other machines) may cause a service on the brink of falling to break.

Process Updates

Pushing a new version of the binary or updating its configuration may initiate a cascading failure if a large number of tasks are affected simultaneously. To prevent this scenario, either account for necessary capacity overhead when

setting up the service's update infrastructure, or push off-peak. Dynamically adjusting the number of in-flight task updates based on the volume of requests and available capacity may be a workable approach.

New Rollouts

A new binary, configuration changes, or a change to the underlying infrastructure stack can result in changes to request profiles, resource usage and limits, backends, or a number of other system components that can trigger a cascading failure.
During a cascading failure, it's usually wise to check for recent changes and consider reverting them, particularly if those changes affected capacity or altered the request profile.
Your service should implement some type of change logging, which can help quickly identify recent changes.

Organic Growth

In many cases, a cascading failure isn't triggered by a specific service change, but because a growth in usage wasn't accompanied by an adjustment to capacity.

Planned Changes, Drains, or Turndowns

If your service is multihomed, some of your capacity may be unavailable because of maintenance or outages in a cluster. Similarly, one of the service's critical dependencies may be drained, resulting in a reduction in capacity for the upstream service due to drain dependencies, or an increase in latency due to having to send the requests to a more distant cluster.

Request profile changes

A backend service may receive requests from different clusters because a frontend service shifted its traffic due to load balancing configuration changes, changes in the traffic mix, or cluster fullness. Also, the average cost to handle an individual payload may have changed due to frontend code or configuration changes.  Similarly,  the  data  handled  by  the  service  may  have  changed

organically due to increased or differing usage by existing users: for instance, both the number and size of images, per user, for a photo storage service tend to increase over time.

Resource limits

Some cluster operating systems allow resource overcommitment. CPU is a fungible resource; often, some machines have some amount of slack CPU available, which provides a bit of a safety net against CPU spikes. The availability of this slack CPU differs between cells, and also between machines within the cell.
Depending upon this slack CPU as your safety net is dangerous. Its availability is entirely dependent on the behavior of the other jobs in the cluster, so it might suddenly drop out at any time. For example, if a team starts a MapReduce that consumes a lot of CPU and schedules on many machines, the aggregate amount of slack CPU can suddenly decrease and trigger CPU starvation conditions for unrelated jobs. When performing load tests, make sure that you remain within your committed resource limits.

Testing for Cascading Failures
The specific ways in which a service will fail can be very hard to predict from first principles. This section discusses testing strategies that can detect if services are susceptible to cascading failures.
You should test your service to determine how it behaves under heavy load in order to gain confidence that it won't enter a cascading failure under various circumstances.

Test Until Failure and Beyond

Understanding the behavior of the service under heavy load is perhaps the most important first step in avoiding cascading failures. Knowing how your system behaves when it is overloaded helps to identify what engineering tasks are the most important for long-term fixes; at the very least, this knowledge may help bootstrap the debugging process for on-call engineers when an emergency arises.

Load test components until they break. As load increases, a component typically handles requests successfully until it reaches a point at which it can't handle more requests. At this point, the component should ideally start serving errors or degraded results in response to additional load, but not significantly reduce the rate at which it successfully handles requests. A component that is highly susceptible to a cascading failure will start crashing or serving a very high rate of errors when it becomes overloaded; a better designed component will instead be able to reject a few requests and survive.
Load testing also reveals where the breaking point is, knowledge that's fundamental to the capacity planning process. It enables you to test for regressions, provision for worst-case thresholds, and to trade off utilization versus safety margins.
Because of caching effects, gradually ramping up load may yield different results than immediately increasing to expected load levels. Therefore, consider testing both gradual and impulse load patterns.
You should also test and understand how the component behaves as it returns to nominal load after having been pushed well beyond that load. Such testing may answer questions such as:
If a component enters a degraded mode on heavy load, is it capable of exiting the degraded mode without human intervention?
If a couple of servers crash under heavy load, how much does the load need to drop in order for the system to stabilize?
If you're load testing a stateful service or a service that employs caching, your load test should track state between multiple interactions and check correctness at high load, which is often where subtle concurrency bugs hit.
Keep in mind that individual components may have different breaking points, so load test each component separately. You won't know in advance which component may hit the wall first, and you want to know how your system behaves when it does.
If you believe your system has proper protections against being overloaded, consider performing failure tests in a small slice of production to find the point at which the components in your system fail under real traffic. These limits may not be adequately reflected by synthetic load test traffic, so real traffic tests may

provide more realistic results than load tests, at the risk of causing user-visible pain. Be careful when testing on real traffic: make sure that you have extra capacity available in case your automatic protections don't work and you need to manually fail over. You might consider some of the following production tests:
Reducing task counts quickly or slowly over time, beyond expected traffic patterns
Rapidly losing a cluster's worth of capacity Blackholing various backends

Test Popular Clients

Understand how large clients use your service.For example, you want to know if clients:
Can queue work while the service is down Use randomized exponential backoff on errors
Are vulnerable to external triggers that can create large amounts of load (e.g., an externally triggered software update might clear an offline client's cache)
Depending on your service, you may or may not be in control of all the client code that talks to your service. However, it's still a good idea to have an understanding of how large clients that interact with your service will behave.
The same principles apply to large internal clients. Stage system failures with the largest clients to see how they react. Ask internal clients how they access your service and what mechanisms they use to handle backend failure.

Test Noncritical Backends

Test your noncritical backends, and make sure their unavailability does not interfere with the critical components of your service.
For example, suppose your frontend has critical and noncritical backends. Often, a given request includes both critical components (e.g., query results) and noncritical components (e.g., spelling suggestions). Your requests may significantly slow down and consume resources waiting for noncritical backends to finish.

In addition to testing behavior when the noncritical backend is unavailable, test how the frontend behaves if the noncritical backend never responds (for example, if it is blackholing requests). Backends advertised as noncritical can still cause problems on frontends when requests have long deadlines. The frontend should not start rejecting lots of requests, running out of resources, or serving with very high latency when a noncritical backend blackholes.

Immediate Steps to Address Cascading Failures
Once you have identified that your service is experiencing a cascading failure, you can use a few different strategies to remedy the situation-and of course, a cascading failure is a good opportunity to use your incident management protocol (Managing Incidents).

Increase Resources

If your system is running at degraded capacity and you have idle resources, adding tasks can be the most expedient way to recover from the outage. However, if the service has entered a death spiral of some sort, adding more resources may not be sufficient to recover.

Stop Health Check Failures/Deaths

Some cluster scheduling systems, such as Borg, check the health of tasks in a job and restart tasks that are unhealthy. This practice may create a failure mode in which health-checking itself makes the service unhealthy. For example, if half the tasks aren't able to accomplish any work because they're starting up and the other half will soon be killed because they're overloaded and failing health checks, temporarily disabling health checks may permit the system to stabilize until all the tasks are running.
Process health checking ("is this binary responding at all?") and service health checking ("is this binary able to respond to this class of requests right now?") are two conceptually distinct operations. Process health checking is relevant to the cluster scheduler, whereas service health checking is relevant to the load balancer. Clearly distinguishing between the two types of health checks can help avoid this scenario.

Restart Servers

If servers are somehow wedged and not making progress, restarting them may help.Try restarting servers when:
Java servers are in a GC death spiral
Some in-flight requests have no deadlines but are consuming resources, leading them to block threads, for example
The servers are deadlocked

Make sure that you identify the source of the cascading failure before you restart your servers. Make sure that taking this action won't simply shift around load. Canary this change, and make it slowly. Your actions may amplify an existing cascading failure if the outage is actually due to an issue like a cold cache.

Drop Traffic

Dropping load is a big hammer, usually reserved for situations in which you have a true cascading failure on your hands and you cannot fix it by other means. For example, if heavy load causes most servers to crash as soon as they become healthy, you can get the service up and running again by:
1. Addressing the initial triggering condition (by adding capacity, for example).
2. Reducing load enough so that the crashing stops. Consider being aggressive here-if the entire service is crash-looping, only allow, say, 1% of the traffic through.
3. Allowing the majority of the servers to become healthy.
4. Gradually ramping up the load.

This strategy allows caches to warm up, connections to be established, etc., before load returns to normal levels.
Obviously, this tactic will cause a lot of user-visible harm. Whether or not you're able to (or if you even should) drop traffic indiscriminately depends on how the service is configured. If you have some mechanism to drop less important traffic (e.g., prefetching), use that mechanism first.
It is important to keep in mind that this strategy enables you to recover from a cascading outage once the underlying problem is fixed. If the issue that started

the cascading failure is not fixed (e.g., insufficient global capacity), then the cascading failure may trigger shortly after all traffic returns. Therefore, before using this strategy, consider fixing (or at least papering over) the root cause or triggering condition. For example, if the service ran out of memory and is now in a death spiral, adding more memory or tasks should be your first step.

Enter Degraded Modes

Serve degraded results by doing less work or dropping unimportant traffic. This strategy must be engineered into your service, and can be implemented only if you know which traffic can be degraded and you have the ability to differentiate between the various payloads.

Eliminate Batch Load

Some services have load that is important, but not critical. Consider turning off those sources of load. For example, if index updates, data copies, or statistics gathering consume resources of the serving path, consider turning off those sources of load during an outage.

Eliminate Bad Traffic

If some queries are creating heavy load or crashes (e.g., queries of death), consider blocking them or eliminating them via other means.

Cascading Failure and Shakespeare


A documentary about Shakespeare's works airs in Japan, and explicitly points to our Shakespeare service as an excellent place to conduct further research. Following the broadcast, traffic to our Asian datacenter surges beyond the service's capacity. This capacity problem is further compounded by a major update to the Shakespeare service that simultaneously occurs in that datacenter.
Fortunately, a number of safeguards are in place that help mitigate the potential for failure. The Production Readiness Review process identified some issues that the team already addressed. For example, the developers built graceful degradation into the service. As capacity becomes scarce, the service no longer returns pictures alongside text or small maps illustrating where a story takes

place. And depending on its purpose, an RPC that times out is either not retried (for example, in the case of the aforementioned pictures), or is retried with a randomized exponential backoff. Despite these safeguards, the tasks fail one by one and are then restarted by Borg, which drives the number of working tasks down even more.
As a result, some graphs on the service dashboard turn an alarming shade of red and SRE is paged. In response, SREs temporarily add capacity to the Asian datacenter by increasing the number of tasks available for the Shakespeare job. By doing so, they're able to restore the Shakespeare service in the Asian cluster.
Afterward, the SRE team writes a postmortem detailing the chain of events, what went well, what could have gone better, and a number of action items to prevent this scenario from occurring again. For example, in the case of a service overload, the GSLB load balancer will redirect some traffic to neighboring datacenters. Also, the SRE team turns on autoscaling, so that the number of tasks automatically increases with traffic, so they don't have to worry about this type of issue again.

Closing Remarks
When systems are overloaded, something needs to give in order to remedy the situation. Once a service passes its breaking point, it is better to allow some user- visible errors or lower-quality results to slip through than try to fully serve every request. Understanding where those breaking points are and how the system behaves beyond them is critical for service owners who want to avoid cascading failures.
Without proper care, some system changes meant to reduce background errors or otherwise improve the steady state can expose the service to greater risk of a full outage. Retrying on failures, shifting load around from unhealthy servers, killing unhealthy servers, adding caches to improve performance or reduce latency: all of these might be implemented to improve the normal case, but can improve the chance of causing a large-scale failure. Be careful when evaluating changes to ensure that one outage is not being traded for another.

107See	Wikipedia,	"Positive	feedback,"
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Positive_feedback.

108A watchdog is often implemented as a thread that wakes up periodically to see whether work has been done since the last time it checked. If not, it assumes that the server is stuck and kills it. For instance, requests of a known type can be sent to the server at regular intervals; if one hasn't been received or processed when expected, this may indicate failure-of the server, the system sending requests, or the intermediate network.

109This is often not a good assumption due to geography; see also Job and Data Organization.

110An instructive exercise, left for the reader: write a simple simulator and see how the amount of useful work the backend can do varies with how much it's overloaded and how many retries are permitted.

111Sometimes you find that a meaningful proportion of your actual serving capacity is as a function of serving from a cache, and if you lost access to that cache, you wouldn't actually be able to serve that many queries. A similar observation holds for latency: a cache can help you achieve latency goals (by lowering the average response time when the query is servable from cache) that you possibly couldn't meet without that cache.

Chapter 23 - Managing Critical State: Distributed Consensus for Reliability
Written by Laura Nolan Edited by Tim Harvey
Processes crash or may need to be restarted. Hard drives fail. Natural disasters can take out several datacenters in a region. Site Reliability Engineers need to anticipate these sorts of failures and develop strategies to keep systems running in spite of them. These strategies usually entail running such systems across multiple sites. Geographically distributing a system is relatively straightforward, but also introduces the need to maintain a consistent view of system state, which is a more nuanced and difficult undertaking.
Groups of processes may want to reliably agree on questions such as: Which process is the leader of a group of processes?
What is the set of processes in a group?
Has a message been successfully committed to a distributed queue? Does a process hold a lease or not?
What is a value in a datastore for a given key?

We've found distributed consensus to be effective in building reliable and highly available systems that require a consistent view of some system state. The distributed consensus problem deals with reaching agreement among a group of processes connected by an unreliable communications network. For instance, several processes in a distributed system may need to be able to form a consistent view of a critical piece of configuration, whether or not a distributed lock is held, or if a message on a queue has been processed. It is one of the most fundamental concepts in distributed computing and one we rely on for virtually every service we offer. Figure 23-1 illustrates a simple model of how a group of processes can achieve a consistent view of system state through distributed consensus.



Figure 23-1. Distributed consensus: agreement among a group of processes

Whenever you see leader election, critical shared state, or distributed locking, we recommend using distributed consensus systems that have been formally proven and tested thoroughly. Informal approaches to solving this problem can lead to outages, and more insidiously, to subtle and hard-to-fix data consistency problems that may prolong outages in your system unnecessarily.

CAP Theorem


The CAP theorem ([Fox99], [Bre12]) holds that a distributed system cannot simultaneously have all three of the following properties:

Consistent views of the data at each node Availability of the data at each node Tolerance to network partitions [Gil02]
The logic is intuitive: if two nodes can't communicate (because the network is partitioned), then the system as a whole can either stop serving some or all requests at some or all nodes (thus reducing availability), or it can serve requests as usual, which results in inconsistent views of the data at each node.
Because network partitions are inevitable (cables get cut, packets get lost or delayed due to congestion, hardware breaks, networking components become misconfigured, etc.), understanding distributed consensus really amounts to understanding how consistency and availability work for your particular application. Commercial pressures often demand high levels of availability, and many applications require consistent views on their data.
Systems and software engineers are usually familiar with the traditional ACID datastore semantics (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability), but a growing number of distributed datastore technologies provide a different set of semantics known as BASE (Basically Available, Soft state, and Eventual consistency). Datastores that support BASE semantics have useful applications for certain kinds of data and can handle large volumes of data and transactions that would be much more costly, and perhaps altogether infeasible, with datastores that support ACID semantics.
Most of these systems that support BASE semantics rely on multimaster replication, where writes can be committed to different processes concurrently, and there is some mechanism to resolve conflicts (often as simple as "latest timestamp wins"). This approach is usually known as eventual consistency. However, eventual consistency can lead to surprising results [Lu15], particularly in the event of clock drift (which is inevitable in distributed systems) or network
partitioning [Kin15].112
It is also difficult for developers to design systems that work well with datastores that support only BASE semantics. Jeff Shute [Shu13], for example, has stated, "we find developers spend a significant fraction of their time building extremely complex and error-prone mechanisms to cope with eventual consistency and handle data that may be out of date. We think this is an unacceptable burden to place on developers and that consistency problems should be solved at the

database level."

System designers cannot sacrifice correctness in order to achieve reliability or performance, particularly around critical state. For example, consider a system that handles financial transactions: reliability or performance requirements don't provide much value if the financial data is not correct. Systems need to be able to reliably synchronize critical state across multiple processes. Distributed consensus algorithms provide this functionality.

Motivating the Use of Consensus: Distributed Systems Coordination Failure
Distributed systems are complex and subtle to understand, monitor, and troubleshoot. Engineers running such systems are often surprised by behavior in the presence of failures. Failures are relatively rare events, and it is not a usual practice to test systems under these conditions. It is very difficult to reason about system behavior during failures. Network partitions are particularly challenging
-a problem that appears to be caused by a full partition may instead be the result of:
A very slow network
Some, but not all, messages being dropped
Throttle occurring in one direction, but not the other direction

The following sections provide examples of problems that occurred in real-world distributed systems and discuss how leader election and distributed consensus algorithms could be used to prevent such issues.

Case Study 1: The Split-Brain Problem

A service is a content repository that allows collaboration between multiple users. It uses sets of two replicated file servers in different racks for reliability. The service needs to avoid writing data simultaneously to both file servers in a set, because doing so could result in data corruption (and possibly unrecoverable data).
Each pair of file servers has one leader and one follower. The servers monitor each other via heartbeats. If one file server cannot contact its partner, it issues a

STONITH (Shoot The Other Node in the Head) command to its partner node to shut the node down, and then takes mastership of its files. This practice is an industry standard method of reducing split-brain instances, although as we shall see, it is conceptually unsound.
What happens if the network becomes slow, or starts dropping packets? In this scenario, file servers exceed their heartbeat timeouts and, as designed, send STONITH commands to their partner nodes and take mastership. However, some commands may not be delivered due to the compromised network. File server pairs may now be in a state in which both nodes are expected to be active for the same resource, or where both are down because both issued and received STONITH commands. This results in either corruption or unavailability of data.
The problem here is that the system is trying to solve a leader election problem using simple timeouts. Leader election is a reformulation of the distributed asynchronous consensus problem, which cannot be solved correctly by using heartbeats.

Case Study 2: Failover Requires Human Intervention

A highly sharded database system has a primary for each shard, which replicates synchronously to a secondary in another datacenter. An external system checks the health of the primaries, and, if they are no longer healthy, promotes the secondary to primary. If the primary can't determine the health of its secondary, it makes itself unavailable and escalates to a human in order to avoid the split- brain scenario seen in Case Study 1.
This solution doesn't risk data loss, but it does negatively impact availability of data. It also unnecessarily increases operational load on the engineers who run the system, and human intervention scales poorly. This sort of event, where a primary and secondary have problems communicating, is highly likely to occur in the case of a larger infrastructure problem, when the responding engineers may already be overloaded with other tasks. If the network is so badly affected that a distributed consensus system cannot elect a master, a human is likely not better positioned to do so.

Case Study 3: Faulty Group-Membership Algorithms

A system has a component that performs indexing and searching services. When

starting, nodes use a gossip protocol to discover each other and join the cluster. The cluster elects a leader, which performs coordination. In the case of a network partition that splits the cluster, each side (incorrectly) elects a master and accepts writes and deletions, leading to a split-brain scenario and data corruption.
The problem of determining a consistent view of group membership across a group of processes is another instance of the distributed consensus problem.
In fact, many distributed systems problems turn out to be different versions of distributed consensus, including master election, group membership, all kinds of distributed locking and leasing, reliable distributed queuing and messaging, and maintenance of any kind of critical shared state that must be viewed consistently across a group of processes. All of these problems should be solved only using distributed consensus algorithms that have been proven formally correct, and whose implementations have been tested extensively. Ad hoc means of solving these sorts of problems (such as heartbeats and gossip protocols) will always have reliability problems in practice.

How Distributed Consensus Works
The consensus problem has multiple variants. When dealing with distributed software systems, we are interested in asynchronous distributed consensus, which applies to environments with potentially unbounded delays in message passing. (Synchronous consensus applies to real-time systems, in which dedicated hardware means that messages will always be passed with specific timing guarantees.)
Distributed consensus algorithms may be crash-fail (which assumes that crashed nodes never return to the system) or crash-recover. Crash-recover algorithms are much more useful, because most problems in real systems are transient in nature due to a slow network, restarts, and so on.
Algorithms may deal with Byzantine or non-Byzantine failures. Byzantine failure occurs when a process passes incorrect messages due to a bug or malicious activity, and are comparatively costly to handle, and less often encountered.
Technically,  solving  the  asynchronous  distributed  consensus  problem  in

bounded time is impossible. As proven by the Dijkstra Prize-winning FLP impossibility result [Fis85], no asynchronous distributed consensus algorithm can guarantee progress in the presence of an unreliable network.
In practice, we approach the distributed consensus problem in bounded time by ensuring that the system will have sufficient healthy replicas and network connectivity to make progress reliably most of the time. In addition, the system should have backoffs with randomized delays. This setup both prevents retries from causing cascade effects and avoids the dueling proposers problem described later in this chapter. The protocols guarantee safety, and adequate redundancy in the system encourages liveness.
The original solution to the distributed consensus problem was Lamport's Paxos protocol [Lam98], but other protocols exist that solve the problem, including Raft [Ong14], Zab [Jun11], and Mencius [Mao08]. Paxos itself has many variations intended to increase performance [Zoo14]. These usually vary only in a single detail, such as giving a special leader role to one process to streamline the protocol.

Paxos Overview: An Example Protocol

Paxos operates as a sequence of proposals, which may or may not be accepted by a majority of the processes in the system. If a proposal isn't accepted, it fails. Each proposal has a sequence number, which imposes a strict ordering on all of the operations in the system.
In the first phase of the protocol, the proposer sends a sequence number to the acceptors. Each acceptor will agree to accept the proposal only if it has not yet seen a proposal with a higher sequence number. Proposers can try again with a higher sequence number if necessary. Proposers must use unique sequence numbers (drawing from disjoint sets, or incorporating their hostname into the sequence number, for instance).
If a proposer receives agreement from a majority of the acceptors, it can commit the proposal by sending a commit message with a value.
The strict sequencing of proposals solves any problems relating to ordering of messages in the system. The requirement for a majority to commit means that two different values cannot be committed for the same proposal, because any

two majorities will overlap in at least one node. Acceptors must write a journal on persistent storage whenever they agree to accept a proposal, because the acceptors need to honor these guarantees after restarting.
Paxos on its own isn't that useful: all it lets you do is to agree on a value and proposal number once. Because only a quorum of nodes need to agree on a value, any given node may not have a complete view of the set of values that have been agreed to. This limitation is true for most distributed consensus algorithms.

System Architecture Patterns for Distributed Consensus
Distributed consensus algorithms are low-level and primitive: they simply allow a set of nodes to agree on a value, once. They don't map well to real design tasks. What makes distributed consensus useful is the addition of higher-level system components such as datastores, configuration stores, queues, locking, and leader election services to provide the practical system functionality that distributed consensus algorithms don't address. Using higher-level components reduces complexity for system designers. It also allows underlying distributed consensus algorithms to be changed if necessary in response to changes in the environment in which the system runs or changes in nonfunctional requirements.
Many systems that successfully use consensus algorithms actually do so as clients of some service that implements those algorithms, such as Zookeeper, Consul, and etcd. Zookeeper [Hun10] was the first open source consensus system to gain traction in the industry because it was easy to use, even with applications that weren't designed to use distributed consensus. The Chubby service fills a similar niche at Google. Its authors point out [Bur06] that providing consensus primitives as a service rather than as libraries that engineers build into their applications frees application maintainers of having to deploy their systems in a way compatible with a highly available consensus service (running the right number of replicas, dealing with group membership, dealing with performance, etc.).

Reliable Replicated State Machines

A replicated state machine (RSM) is a system that executes the same set of

operations, in the same order, on several processes. RSMs are the fundamental building block of useful distributed systems components and services such as data or configuration storage, locking, and leader election (described in more detail later).
The operations on an RSM are ordered globally through a consensus algorithm. This is a powerful concept: several papers ([Agu10], [Kir08], [Sch90]) show that any deterministic program can be implemented as a highly available replicated service by being implemented as an RSM.
As shown in Figure 23-2, replicated state machines are a system implemented at a logical layer above the consensus algorithm. The consensus algorithm deals with agreement on the sequence of operations, and the RSM executes the operations in that order. Because not every member of the consensus group is necessarily a member of each consensus quorum, RSMs may need to synchronize state from peers. As described by Kirsch and Amir [Kir08], you can use a sliding-window protocol to reconcile state between peer processes in an RSM.

Figure 23-2. The relationship between consensus algorithms and replicated state machines

Reliable Replicated Datastores and Configuration Stores

Reliable replicated datastores are an application of replicated state machines. Replicated datastores use consensus algorithms in the critical path of their work. Thus, performance, throughput, and the ability to scale are very important in this type of design. As with datastores built with other underlying technologies, consensus-based datastores can provide a variety of consistency semantics for read operations, which make a huge difference to how the datastore scales.

These trade-offs are discussed in Distributed Consensus Performance.

Other (nondistributed-consensus-based) systems often simply rely on timestamps to provide bounds on the age of data being returned. Timestamps are highly problematic in distributed systems because it's impossible to guarantee that clocks are synchronized across multiple machines. Spanner [Cor12] addresses this problem by modeling the worst-case uncertainty involved and slowing down processing where necessary to resolve that uncertainty.

Highly Available Processing Using Leader Election

Leader election in distributed systems is an equivalent problem to distributed consensus. Replicated services that use a single leader to perform some specific type of work in the system are very common; the single leader mechanism is a way of ensuring mutual exclusion at a coarse level.
This type of design is appropriate where the work of the service leader can be performed by one process or is sharded. System designers can construct a highly available service by writing it as though it was a simple program, replicating that process and using leader election to ensure that only one leader is working at any point in time (as shown in Figure 23-3). Often the work of the leader is that of coordinating some pool of workers in the system. This pattern was used in GFS [Ghe03] (which has been replaced by Colossus) and the Bigtable key-value store [Cha06].



Figure 23-3. Highly available system using a replicated service for master election
In this type of component, unlike the replicated datastore, the consensus algorithm is not in the critical path of the main work the system is doing, so throughput is usually not a major concern.

Distributed Coordination and Locking Services

A barrier in a distributed computation is a primitive that blocks a group of processes from proceeding until some condition is met (for example, until all parts of one phase of a computation are completed). Use of a barrier effectively splits a distributed computation into logical phases. For instance, as shown in Figure 23-4, a barrier could be used in implementing the MapReduce [Dea04] model to ensure that the entire Map phase is completed before the Reduce part of the computation proceeds.


Figure 23-4. Barriers for process coordination in the MapReduce computation

The barrier could be implemented by a single coordinator process, but this implementation adds a single point of failure that is usually unacceptable. The barrier can also be implemented as an RSM. The Zookeeper consensus service can implement the barrier pattern: see [Hun10] and [Zoo14].
Locks are another useful coordination primitive that can be implemented as an RSM. Consider a distributed system in which worker processes atomically consume some input files and write results. Distributed locks can be used to prevent multiple workers from processing the same input file. In practice, it is essential to use renewable leases with timeouts instead of indefinite locks, because doing so prevents locks from being held indefinitely by processes that crash. Distributed locking is beyond the scope of this chapter, but bear in mind that distributed locks are a low-level systems primitive that should be used with

care. Most applications should use a higher-level system that provides distributed transactions.

Reliable Distributed Queuing and Messaging

Queues are a common data structure, often used as a way to distribute tasks between a number of worker processes.
Queuing-based systems can tolerate failure and loss of worker nodes relatively easily. However, the system must ensure that claimed tasks are successfully processed. For that purpose, a lease system (discussed earlier in regard to locks) is recommended instead of an outright removal from the queue. The downside of queuing-based systems is that loss of the queue prevents the entire system from operating. Implementing the queue as an RSM can minimize the risk, and make the entire system far more robust.
Atomic broadcast is a distributed systems primitive in which messages are received reliably and in the same order by all participants. This is an incredibly powerful distributed systems concept and very useful in designing practical systems. A huge number of publish-subscribe messaging infrastructures exist for the use of system designers, although not all of them provide atomic guarantees. Chandra and Toueg [Cha96] demonstrate the equivalence of atomic broadcast and consensus.
The queuing-as-work-distribution pattern, which uses the queue as a load balancing device, as shown in Figure 23-5, can be considered to be point-to- point messaging. Messaging systems usually also implement a publish-subscribe queue, where messages may be consumed by many clients that subscribe to a channel or topic. In this one-to-many case, the messages on the queue are stored as a persistent ordered list. Publish-subscribe systems can be used for many types of applications that require clients to subscribe to receive notifications of some type of event. Publish-subscribe systems can also be used to implement coherent distributed caches.



Figure 23-5. A queue-oriented work distribution system using a reliable consensus-based queuing component
Queuing and messaging systems often need excellent throughput, but don't need extremely low latency (due to seldom being directly user-facing). However, very high latencies in a system like the one just described, which has multiple workers claiming tasks from a queue, could become a problem if the percentage of processing time for each task grew significantly.

Distributed Consensus Performance
Conventional wisdom has generally held that consensus algorithms are too slow and costly to use for many systems that require high throughput and low latency [Bol11]. This conception is simply not true-while implementations can be slow, there are a number of tricks that can improve performance. Distributed

consensus algorithms are at the core of many of Google's critical systems, described in [Ana13], [Bur06], [Cor12], and [Shu13], and they have proven extremely effective in practice. Google's scale is not an advantage here: in fact, our scale is more of a disadvantage because it introduces two main challenges: our datasets tend to be large and our systems run over a wide geographical distance. Larger datasets multiplied by several replicas represent significant computing costs, and larger geographical distances increase latency between replicas, which in turn reduces performance.
There is no one "best" distributed consensus and state machine replication algorithm for performance, because performance is dependent on a number of factors relating to workload, the system's performance objectives, and how the system is to be deployed.113 While some of the following sections present
research, with the aim of increasing understanding of what is possible to achieve with distributed consensus, many of the systems described are available and are in use now.
Workloads can vary in many ways and understanding how they can vary is critical to discussing performance. In the case of a consensus system, workload may vary in terms of:
Throughput: the number of proposals being made per unit of time at peak load
The type of requests: proportion of operations that change state The consistency semantics required for read operations Request sizes, if size of data payload can vary
Deployment strategies vary, too. For example: Is the deployment local area or wide area?
What kinds of quorum are used, and where are the majority of processes?
Does the system use sharding, pipelining, and batching?

Many consensus systems use a distinguished leader process and require all requests to go to this special node. As shown in Figure 23-6, as a result, the performance of the system as perceived by clients in different geographic locations may vary considerably, simply because more distant nodes have longer round-trip times to the leader process.



Figure 23-6. The effect of distance from a server process on perceived latency at the client

Multi-Paxos: Detailed Message Flow

The Multi-Paxos protocol uses a strong leader process: unless a leader has not yet been elected or some failure occurs, it requires only one round trip from the proposer to a quorum of acceptors to reach consensus. Using a strong leader process is optimal in terms of the number of messages to be passed, and is typical of many consensus protocols.
Figure 23-7 shows an initial state with a new proposer executing the first Prepare/Promise phase of the protocol. Executing this phase establishes a new numbered view, or leader term. On subsequent executions of the protocol, while the view remains the same, the first phase is unnecessary because the proposer that established the view can simply send Accept messages, and consensus is reached once a quorum of responses is received (including the proposer itself).



Figure 23-7. Basic Multi-Paxos message flow

Another process in the group can assume the proposer role to propose messages at any time, but changing the proposer has a performance cost. It necessitates the extra round trip to execute Phase 1 of the protocol, but more importantly, it may cause a dueling proposers situation in which proposals repeatedly interrupt each other and no proposals can be accepted, as shown in Figure 23-8. Because this scenario is a form of a livelock, it can continue indefinitely.



Figure 23-8. Dueling proposers in Multi-Paxos

All practical consensus systems address this issue of collisions, usually either by electing a proposer process, which makes all proposals in the system, or by using a rotating proposer that allocates each process particular slots for their proposals.
For systems that use a leader process, the leader election process must be tuned carefully to balance the system unavailability that occurs when no leader is present with the risk of dueling proposers. It's important to implement the right timeouts and backoff strategies. If multiple processes detect that there is no leader and all attempt to become leader at the same time, then none of the processes is likely to succeed (again, dueling proposers). Introducing randomness is the best approach. Raft [Ong14], for example, has a well-thought- out method of approaching the leader election process.

Scaling Read-Heavy Workloads

Scaling read workload is often critical because many workloads are read-heavy. Replicated datastores have the advantage that the data is available in multiple places, meaning that if strong consistency is not required for all reads, data could be read from any replica. This technique of reading from replicas works well for

certain applications, such as Google's Photon system [Ana13], which uses distributed consensus to coordinate the work of multiple pipelines. Photon uses an atomic compare-and-set operation for state modification (inspired by atomic registers), which must be absolutely consistent; but read operations may be served from any replica, because stale data results in extra work being performed but not incorrect results [Gup15]. The trade-off is worthwhile.
In order to guarantee that data being read is up-to-date and consistent with any changes made before the read is performed, it is necessary to do one of the following:
Perform a read-only consensus operation.
Read the data from a replica that is guaranteed to be the most up-to-date. In a system that uses a stable leader process (as many distributed consensus implementations do), the leader can provide this guarantee.
Use quorum leases, in which some replicas are granted a lease on all or part of the data in the system, allowing strongly consistent local reads at the cost of some write performance. This technique is discussed in detail in the following section.

Quorum Leases

Quorum leases [Mor14] are a recently developed distributed consensus performance optimization aimed at reducing latency and increasing throughput for read operations. As previously mentioned, in the case of classic Paxos and most other distributed consensus protocols, performing a strongly consistent read (i.e., one that is guaranteed to have the most up-to-date view of state) requires either a distributed consensus operation that reads from a quorum of replicas, or a stable leader replica that is guaranteed to have seen all recent state changing operations. In many systems, read operations vastly outnumber writes, so this reliance on either a distributed operation or a single replica harms latency and system throughput.
The quorum leasing technique simply grants a read lease on some subset of the replicated datastore's state to a quorum of replicas. The lease is for a specific (usually brief) period of time. Any operation that changes the state of that data must be acknowledged by all replicas in the read quorum. If any of these replicas becomes unavailable, the data cannot be modified until the lease expires.

Quorum leases are particularly useful for read-heavy workloads in which reads for particular subsets of the data are concentrated in a single geographic region.

Distributed Consensus Performance and Network Latency

Consensus systems face two major physical constraints on performance when committing state changes. One is network round-trip time and the other is time it takes to write data to persistent storage, which will be examined later.
Network round-trip times vary enormously depending on source and destination location, which are impacted both by the physical distance between the source and the destination, and by the amount of congestion on the network. Within a single datacenter, round-trip times between machines should be on the order of a millisecond. A typical round-trip-time (RTT) within the United States is 45 milliseconds, and from New York to London is 70 milliseconds.
Consensus system performance over a local area network can be comparable to that of an asynchronous leader-follower replication system [Bol11], such as many traditional databases use for replication. However, much of the availability benefits of distributed consensus systems require replicas to be "distant" from each other, in order to be in different failure domains.
Many consensus systems use TCP/IP as their communication protocol. TCP/IP is connection-oriented and provides some strong reliability guarantees regarding FIFO sequencing of messages. However, setting up a new TCP/IP connection requires a network round trip to perform the three-way handshake that sets up a connection before any data can be sent or received. TCP/IP slow start initially limits the bandwidth of the connection until its limits have been established. Initial TCP/IP window sizes range from 4 to 15 KB.
TCP/IP slow start is probably not an issue for the processes that form a consensus group: they will establish connections to each other and keep these connections open for reuse because they'll be in frequent communication. However, for systems with a very high number of clients, it may not be practical for all clients to keep a persistent connection to the consensus clusters open, because open TCP/IP connections do consume some resources, e.g., file descriptors, in addition to generating keepalive traffic. This overhead may be an important issue for applications that use very highly sharded consensus-based datastores containing thousands of replicas and an even larger numbers of

clients. A solution is to use a pool of regional proxies, as shown in Figure 23-9, which hold persistent TCP/IP connections to the consensus group in order to avoid the setup overhead over long distances. Proxies may also be a good way to encapsulate sharding and load balancing strategies, as well as discovery of cluster members and leaders.


Figure 23-9. Using proxies to reduce the need for clients to open TCP/IP connections across regions

Reasoning About Performance: Fast Paxos

Fast Paxos [Lam06] is a version of the Paxos algorithm designed to improve its performance over wide area networks. Using Fast Paxos, each client can send Propose messages directly to each member of a group of acceptors, instead of through a leader, as in Classic Paxos or Multi-Paxos. The idea is to substitute

one parallel message send from the client to all acceptors in Fast Paxos for two message send operations in Classic Paxos:
One message from the client to a single proposer
A parallel message send operation from the proposer to the other replicas

Intuitively, it seems as though Fast Paxos should always be faster than Classic Paxos. However, that's not true: if the client in the Fast Paxos system has a high RTT (round-trip time) to the acceptors, and the acceptors have fast connections to each other, we have substituted N parallel messages across the slower network links (in Fast Paxos) for one message across the slower link plus N parallel messages across the faster links (Classic Paxos). Due to the latency tail effect, the majority of the time, a single round trip across a slow link with a distribution of latencies is faster than a quorum (as shown in [Jun07]), and therefore, Fast Paxos is slower than Classic Paxos in this case.
Many systems batch multiple operations into a single transaction at the acceptor to increase throughput. Having clients act as proposers also makes it much more difficult to batch proposals. The reason for this is that proposals arrive independently at acceptors so you can't then batch them in a consistent way.

Stable Leaders

We have seen how Multi-Paxos elects a stable leader to improve performance. Zab [Jun11] and Raft [Ong14] are also examples of protocols that elect a stable leader for performance reasons. This approach can allow read optimizations, as the leader has the most up-to-date state, but also has several problems:
All operations that change state must be sent via the leader, a requirement that adds network latency for clients that are not located near the leader.
The leader process's outgoing network bandwidth is a system bottleneck [Mao08], because the leader's Accept message contains all of the data related to any proposal, whereas other messages contain only acknowledgments of a numbered transaction with no data payload.
If the leader happens to be on a machine with performance problems, then the throughput of the entire system will be reduced.
Almost all distributed consensus systems that have been designed with performance in mind use either the single stable leader pattern or a system of

rotating leadership in which each numbered distributed consensus algorithm is preassigned to a replica (usually by a simple modulus of the transaction ID). Algorithms that use this approach include Mencius [Mao08] and Egalitarian Paxos [Mor12a].
Over a wide area network with clients spread out geographically and replicas from the consensus group located reasonably near to the clients, such leader election leads to lower perceived latency for clients because their network RTT to the nearest replica will, on average, be smaller than that to an arbitrary leader.

Batching

Batching, as described in Reasoning About Performance: Fast Paxos, increases system throughput, but it still leaves replicas idle while they await replies to messages they have sent. The inefficiencies presented by idle replicas can be solved by pipelining, which allows multiple proposals to be in-flight at once. This optimization is very similar to the TCP/IP case, in which the protocol attempts to "keep the pipe full" using a sliding-window approach. Pipelining is normally used in combination with batching.
The batches of requests in the pipeline are still globally ordered with a view number and a transaction number, so this method does not violate the global ordering properties required to run a replicated state machine. This optimization method is discussed in [Bol11] and [San11].

Disk Access

Logging to persistent storage is required so that a node, having crashed and returned to the cluster, honors whatever previous commitments it made regarding ongoing consensus transactions. In the Paxos protocol, for instance, acceptors cannot agree to a proposal when they have already agreed to a proposal with a higher sequence number. If details of agreed and committed proposals are not logged to persistent storage, then an acceptor might violate the protocol if it crashes and is restarted, leading to inconsistent state.
The time required to write an entry to a log on disk varies greatly depending on what hardware or virtualized environment is used, but is likely to take between one and several milliseconds.

The message flow for Multi-Paxos was discussed in Multi-Paxos: Detailed Message Flow, but this section did not show where the protocol must log state changes to disk. A disk write must happen whenever a process makes a commitment that it must honor. In the performance-critical second phase of Multi-Paxos, these points occur before an acceptor sends an Accepted message in response to a proposal, and before the proposer sends the Accept message, because this Accept message is also an implicit Accepted message [Lam98].
This means that the latency for a single consensus operation involves the following:
One disk write on the proposer Parallel messages to the acceptors Parallel disk writes at the acceptors The return messages
There is a version of the Multi-Paxos protocol that's useful for cases in which disk write time dominates: this variant doesn't consider the proposer's Accept message to be an implicit Accepted message. Instead, the proposer writes to disk in parallel with the other processes and sends an explicit Accept message. Latency then becomes proportional to the time taken to send two messages and for a quorum of processes to execute a synchronous write to disk in parallel.

If latency for performing a small random write to disk is on the order of 10 milliseconds, the rate of consensus operations will be limited to approximately 100 per second. These times assume that network round-trip times are negligible and the proposer performs its logging in parallel with the acceptors.
As we have seen already, distributed consensus algorithms are often used as the basis for building a replicated state machine. RSMs also need to keep transaction logs for recovery purposes (for the same reasons as any datastore). The consensus algorithm's log and the RSM's transaction log can be combined into a single log. Combining these logs avoids the need to constantly alternate between writing to two different physical locations on disk [Bol11], reducing the time spent on seek operations. The disks can sustain more operations per second and therefore, the system as a whole can perform more transactions.
In a datastore, disks have purposes other than maintaining logs: system state is generally maintained on disk. Log writes must be flushed directly to disk, but

writes for state changes can be written to a memory cache and flushed to disk later, reordered to use the most efficient schedule [Bol11].
Another possible optimization is batching multiple client operations together into one operation at the proposer ([Ana13], [Bol11], [Cha07], [Jun11], [Mao08], [Mor12a]). This amortizes the fixed costs of the disk logging and network latency over the larger number of operations, increasing throughput.

Deploying Distributed Consensus-Based Systems
The most critical decisions system designers must make when deploying a consensus-based system concern the number of replicas to be deployed and the location of those replicas.

Number of Replicas

In general, consensus-based systems operate using majority quorums, i.e., a group of 2f + 1 replicas may tolerate f failures (if Byzantine fault tolerance, in which the system is resistant to replicas returning incorrect results, is required, then 3f + 1 replicas may tolerate f failures [Cas99]). For non-Byzantine failures, the minimum number of replicas that can be deployed is three-if two are deployed, then there is no tolerance for failure of any process. Three replicas may tolerate one failure. Most system downtime is a result of planned maintenance [Ken12]: three replicas allow a system to operate normally when one replica is down for maintenance (assuming that the remaining two replicas can handle system load at an acceptable performance).
If an unplanned failure occurs during a maintenance window, then the consensus system becomes unavailable. Unavailability of the consensus system is usually unacceptable, and so five replicas should be run, allowing the system to operate with up to two failures. No intervention is necessarily required if four out of five replicas in a consensus system remain, but if three are left, an additional replica or two should be added.
If a consensus system loses so many of its replicas that it cannot form a quorum, then that system is, in theory, in an unrecoverable state because the durable logs of at least one of the missing replicas cannot be accessed. If no quorum remains, it's possible that a decision that was seen only by the missing replicas was made.

Administrators may be able to force a change in the group membership and add new replicas that catch up from the existing one in order to proceed, but the possibility of data loss always remains-a situation that should be avoided if at all possible.
In a disaster, administrators have to decide whether to perform such a forceful reconfiguration or to wait for some period of time for machines with system state to become available. When such decisions are being made, treatment of the system's log (in addition to monitoring) becomes critical. Theoretical papers often point out that consensus can be used to construct a replicated log, but fail to discuss how to deal with replicas that may fail and recover (and thus miss some sequence of consensus decisions) or lag due to slowness. In order to maintain robustness of the system, it is important that these replicas do catch up.
The replicated log is not always a first-class citizen in distributed consensus theory, but it is a very important aspect of production systems. Raft describes a method for managing the consistency of replicated logs [Ong14] explicitly defining how any gaps in a replica's log are filled. If a five-instance Raft system loses all of its members except for its leader, the leader is still guaranteed to have full knowledge of all committed decisions. On the other hand, if the missing majority of members included the leader, no strong guarantees can be made regarding how up-to-date the remaining replicas are.
There is a relationship between performance and the number of replicas in a system that do not need to form part of a quorum: a minority of slower replicas may lag behind, allowing the quorum of better-performing replicas to run faster (as long as the leader performs well). If replica performance varies significantly, then every failure may reduce the performance of the system overall because slow outliers will be required to form a quorum. The more failures or lagging replicas a system can tolerate, the better the system's performance overall is likely to be.
The issue of cost should also be considered in managing replicas: each replica uses costly computing resources. If the system in question is a single cluster of processes, the cost of running replicas is probably not a large consideration. However, the cost of replicas can be a serious consideration for systems such as Photon [Ana13], which uses a sharded configuration in which each shard is a full group of processes running a consensus algorithm. As the number of shards grows, so does the cost of each additional replica, because a number of processes

equal to the number of shards must be added to the system.

The decision about the number of replicas for any system is thus a trade-off between the following factors:
The need for reliability
Frequency of planned maintenance affecting the system Risk
Performance Cost
This calculation will be different for each system: systems have different service level objectives for availability; some organizations perform maintenance more regularly than others; and organizations use hardware of varying cost, quality, and reliability.

Location of Replicas

Decisions about where to deploy the processes that comprise a consensus cluster are made based upon two factors: a trade-off between the failure domains that the system should handle, and the latency requirements for the system. Multiple complex issues are at play in deciding where to locate replicas.
A failure domain is the set of components of a system that can become unavailable as a result of a single failure. Example failure domains include the following:
A physical machine
A rack in a datacenter served by a single power supply
Several racks in a datacenter that are served by one piece of networking equipment
A datacenter that could be rendered unavailable by a fiber optic cable cut
A set of datacenters in a single geographic area that could all be affected by a single natural disaster such as a hurricane
In general, as the distance between replicas increases, so does the round-trip time between replicas, as well as the size of the failure the system will be able to tolerate. For most consensus systems, increasing the round-trip time between replicas will also increase the latency of operations.

The extent to which latency matters, as well as the ability to survive a failure in a particular domain, is very system-dependent. Some consensus system architectures don't require particularly high throughput or low latency: for example, a consensus system that exists in order to provide group membership and leader election services for a highly available service probably isn't heavily loaded, and if the consensus transaction time is only a fraction of the leader lease time, then its performance isn't critical. Batch-oriented systems are also less affected by latency: operation batch sizes can be increased to increase throughput.
It doesn't always make sense to continually increase the size of the failure domain whose loss the system can withstand. For instance, if all of the clients using a consensus system are running within a particular failure domain (say, the New York area) and deploying a distributed consensus-based system across a wider geographical area would allow it to remain serving during outages in that failure domain (say, Hurricane Sandy), is it worth it? Probably not, because the system's clients will be down as well so the system will see no traffic. The extra cost in terms of latency, throughput, and computing resources would give no benefit.
You should take disaster recovery into account when deciding where to locate your replicas: in a system that stores critical data, the consensus replicas are also essentially online copies of the system data. However, when critical data is at stake, it's important to back up regular snapshots elsewhere, even in the case of solid consensus-based systems that are deployed in several diverse failure domains. There are two failure domains that you can never escape: the software itself, and human error on the part of the system's administrators. Bugs in software can emerge under unusual circumstances and cause data loss, while system misconfiguration can have similar effects. Human operators can also err, or perform sabotage causing data loss.
When making decisions about location of replicas, remember that the most important measure of performance is client perception: ideally, the network round-trip time from the clients to the consensus system's replicas should be minimized. Over a wide area network, leaderless protocols like Mencius or Egalitarian Paxos may have a performance edge, particularly if the consistency constraints of the application mean that it is possible to execute read-only operations on any system replica without performing a consensus operation.

Capacity and Load Balancing

When designing a deployment, you must make sure there is sufficient capacity to deal with load. In the case of sharded deployments, you can adjust capacity by adjusting the number of shards. However, for systems that can read from consensus group members that are not the leader, you can increase read capacity by adding more replicas. Adding more replicas has a cost: in an algorithm that uses a strong leader, adding replicas imposes more load on the leader process, while in a peer-to-peer protocol, adding replicas imposes more load on all processes. However, if there is ample capacity for write operations, but a read- heavy workload is stressing the system, adding replicas may be the best approach.
It should be noted that adding a replica in a majority quorum system can potentially decrease system availability somewhat (as shown in Figure 23-10). A typical deployment for Zookeeper or Chubby uses five replicas, so a majority quorum requires three replicas. The system will still make progress if two replicas, or 40%, are unavailable. With six replicas, a quorum requires four replicas: only 33% of the replicas can be unavailable if the system is to remain live.
Considerations regarding failure domains therefore apply even more strongly when a sixth replica is added: if an organization has five datacenters, and generally runs consensus groups with five processes, one in each datacenter, then loss of one datacenter still leaves one spare replica in each group. If a sixth replica is deployed in one of the five datacenters, then an outage in that datacenter removes both of the spare replicas in the group, thereby reducing capacity by 33%.



Figure 23-10. Adding an extra replica in one region may reduce system availability. Colocating multiple replicas in a single datacenter may reduce system availability: here, there is a quorum without any redundancy remaining.
If clients are dense in a particular geographic region, it is best to locate replicas close to clients. However, deciding where exactly to locate replicas may require some careful thought around load balancing and how a system deals with overload. As shown in Figure 23-11, if a system simply routes client read requests to the nearest replica, then a large spike in load concentrated in one region may overwhelm the nearest replica, and then the next-closest replica, and so on-this is cascading failure (see Addressing Cascading Failures). This type of overload can often happen as a result of batch jobs beginning, especially if

several begin at the same time.

We've already seen the reason that many distributed consensus systems use a leader process to improve performance. However, it's important to understand that the leader replicas will use more computational resources, particularly outgoing network capacity. This is because the leader sends proposal messages that include the proposed data, but replicas send smaller messages, usually just containing agreement with a particular consensus transaction ID. Organizations that run highly sharded consensus systems with a very large number of processes may find it necessary to ensure that leader processes for the different shards are balanced relatively evenly across different datacenters. Doing so prevents the system as a whole from being bottlenecked on outgoing network capacity for just one datacenter, and makes for much greater overall system capacity.


Figure 23-11. Colocating leader processes leads to uneven bandwidth utilization

Another downside of deploying consensus groups in multiple datacenters (shown by Figure 23-11) is the very extreme change in the system that can occur if the datacenter hosting the leaders suffers a widespread failure (power,

networking equipment failure, or fiber cut, for instance). As shown in Figure 23- 12, in this failure scenario, all of the leaders should fail over to another datacenter, either split evenly or en masse into one datacenter. In either case, the link between the other two datacenters will suddenly receive a lot more network traffic from this system. This would be an inopportune moment to discover that the capacity on that link is insufficient.


Figure 23-12. When colocated leaders fail over en masse, patterns of network utilization change dramatically
However, this type of deployment could easily be an unintended result of automatic processes in the system that have bearing on how leaders are chosen. For instance:
Clients will experience better latency for any operations handled via the leader if the leader is located closest to them. An algorithm that attempts to site leaders near the bulk of clients could take advantage of this insight.
An algorithm might try to locate leaders on machines with the best performance. A pitfall of this approach is that if one of the three datacenters houses faster machines, then a disproportionate amount of traffic will be sent to that datacenter, resulting in extreme traffic changes should that datacenter go offline. To avoid this problem, the algorithm must also take into account distribution balance against machine capabilities when selecting machines.
A leader election algorithm might favor processes that have been running

longer. Longer-running processes are quite likely to be correlated with location if software releases are performed on a per-datacenter basis.

Quorum composition

When determining where to locate replicas in a consensus group, it is important to consider the effect of the geographical distribution (or, more precisely, the network latencies between replicas) on the performance of the group.
One approach is to spread the replicas as evenly as possible, with similar RTTs between all replicas. All other factors being equal (such as workload, hardware, and network performance), this arrangement should lead to fairly consistent performance across all regions, regardless of where the group leader is located (or for each member of the consensus group, if a leaderless protocol is in use).
Geography can greatly complicate this approach. This is particularly true for intra-continental versus transpacific and transatlantic traffic. Consider a system that spans North America and Europe: it is impossible to locate replicas equidistant from each other because there will always be a longer lag for transatlantic traffic than for intracontinental traffic. No matter what, transactions from one region will need to make a transatlantic round trip in order to reach consensus.
However, as shown in Figure 23-13, in order to try to distribute traffic as evenly as possible, systems designers might choose to site five replicas, with two replicas roughly centrally in the US, one on the east coast, and two in Europe. Such a distribution would mean that in the average case, consensus could be achieved in North America without waiting for replies from Europe, or that from Europe, consensus can be achieved by exchanging messages only with the east coast replica. The east coast replica acts as a linchpin of sorts, where two possible quorums overlap.



Figure 23-13. Overlapping quorums with one replica acting as a link

As shown in Figure 23-14, loss of this replica means that system latency is likely to change drastically: instead of being largely influenced by either central US to east coast RTT or EU to east coast RTT, latency will be based on EU to central RTT, which is around 50% higher than EU to east coast RTT. The geographic distance and network RTT between the nearest possible quorum increases enormously.



Figure 23-14. Loss of the link replica immediately leads to a longer RTT for any quorum
This scenario is a key weakness of the simple majority quorum when applied to groups composed of replicas with very different RTTs between members. In such cases, a hierarchical quorum approach may be useful. As diagrammed in Figure 23-15, nine replicas may be deployed in three groups of three. A quorum may be formed by a majority of groups, and a group may be included in the quorum if a majority of the group's members are available. This means that a replica may be lost in the central group without incurring a large impact on overall system performance because the central group may still vote on transactions with two of its three replicas.
There is, however, a resource cost associated with running a higher number of replicas. In a highly sharded system with a read-heavy workload that is largely fulfillable by replicas, we might mitigate this cost by using fewer consensus groups. Such a strategy means that the overall number of processes in the system may not change.



Figure 23-15. Hierarchical quorums can be used to reduce reliance on the central replica

Monitoring Distributed Consensus Systems
As we've already seen, distributed consensus algorithms are at the core of many of Google's critical systems ([Ana13], [Bur06], [Cor12], [Shu13]). All important production systems need monitoring, in order to detect outages or problems and for troubleshooting. Experience has shown us that there are certain specific aspects of distributed consensus systems that warrant special attention. These are:
The number of members running in each consensus group, and the status of each process (healthy or not healthy)
A process may be running but unable to make progress for some (e.g., hardware-related) reason.
Persistently lagging replicas

Healthy members of a consensus group can still potentially be in multiple different states. A group member may be recovering state from peers after

startup, or lagging behind the quorum in the group, or it may be up-to-date and participating fully, and it may be the leader.
Whether or not a leader exists

A system based on an algorithm such as Multi-Paxos that uses a leader role must be monitored to ensure that a leader exists, because if the system has no leader, it is totally unavailable.
Number of leader changes

Rapid changes of leadership impair performance of consensus systems that use a stable leader, so the number of leader changes should be monitored. Consensus algorithms usually mark a leadership change with a new term or view number, so this number provides a useful metric to monitor. Too rapid of an increase in leader changes signals that the leader is flapping, perhaps due to network connectivity issues. A decrease in the view number could signal a serious bug.
Consensus transaction number

Operators need to know whether or not the consensus system is making progress. Most consensus algorithms use an increasing consensus transaction number to indicate progress. This number should be seen to be increasing over time if a system is healthy.
Number of proposals seen; number of proposals agreed upon

These numbers indicate whether or not the system is operating correctly.

Throughput and latency

Although not specific to distributed consensus systems, these characteristics of their consensus system should be monitored and understood by administrators.
In order to understand system performance and to help troubleshoot performance issues, you might also monitor the following:
Latency distributions for proposal acceptance

Distributions of network latencies observed between parts of the system in different locations
The amount of time acceptors spend on durable logging Overall bytes accepted per second in the system

Conclusion
We explored the definition of the distributed consensus problem, and presented some system architecture patterns for distributed-consensus based systems, as well as examining the performance characteristics and some of the operational concerns around distributed consensus-based systems.
We deliberately avoided an in-depth discussion about specific algorithms, protocols, or implementations in this chapter. Distributed coordination systems and the technologies underlying them are evolving quickly, and this information would rapidly become out of date, unlike the fundamentals that are discussed here. However, these fundamentals, along with the articles referenced throughout this chapter, will enable you to use the distributed coordination tools available today, as well as future software.
If you remember nothing else from this chapter, keep in mind the sorts of problems that distributed consensus can be used to solve, and the types of problems that can arise when ad hoc methods such as heartbeats are used instead of distributed consensus. Whenever you see leader election, critical shared state, or distributed locking, think about distributed consensus: any lesser approach is a ticking bomb waiting to explode in your systems.

112Kyle Kingsbury has written an extensive series of articles on distributed systems correctness, which contain many examples of unexpected and incorrect behavior in these kinds of datastores. See https://aphyr.com/tags/jepsen.

113In particular, the performance of the original Paxos algorithm is not ideal, but has been greatly improved over the years.

Chapter 24 - Distributed Periodic Scheduling with Cron
Written by �tep�n Davidovic114 Edited by Kavita Guliani
This chapter describes Google's implementation of a distributed cron service that serves the vast majority of internal teams that need periodic scheduling of compute jobs. Throughout cron's existence, we have learned many lessons about how to design and implement what might seem like a basic service. Here, we discuss the problems that distributed crons face and outline some potential solutions.
Cron is a common Unix utility designed to periodically launch arbitrary jobs at user-defined times or intervals. We first analyze the base principles of cron and its most common implementations, and then review how an application such as cron can work in a large, distributed environment in order to increase the reliability of the system against single-machine failures. We describe a distributed cron system that is deployed on a small number of machines, but can launch cron jobs across an entire datacenter in conjunction with a datacenter scheduling system like Borg [Ver15].

Cron
Let's discuss how cron is typically used, in the single machine case, before diving into running it as a cross-datacenter service.

Introduction

Cron is designed so that the system administrators and common users of the system can specify commands to run, and when these commands run. Cron executes various types of jobs, including garbage collection and periodic data analysis. The most common time specification format is called "crontab." This format supports simple intervals (e.g., "once a day at noon" or "every hour on

the hour"). Complex intervals, such as "every Saturday, which is also the 30th day of the month," can also be configured.
Cron is usually implemented using a single component, which is commonly referred to as crond. crond is a daemon that loads the list of scheduled cron jobs. Jobs are launched according to their specified execution times.

Reliability Perspective

Several aspects of the cron service are notable from a reliability perspective:

Cron's failure domain is essentially just one machine. If the machine is not running, neither the cron scheduler nor the jobs it launches can run.115 Consider a very simple distributed case with two machines, in which your cron scheduler launches jobs on a different worker machine (for example,
using SSH). This scenario presents two distinct failure domains that could impact our ability to launch jobs: either the scheduler machine or the destination machine could fail.
The only state that needs to persist across crond restarts(including machine reboots) is the crontab configuration itself. The cron launches are fire-and- forget, and crond makes no attempt to track these launches.
anacron is a notable exception to this. anacron attempts to launch jobs that would have been launched when the system was down. Relaunch attempts are limited to jobs that run daily or less frequently. This functionality is very useful for running maintenance jobs on workstations and notebooks, and is facilitated by a file that retains the timestamp of the last launch for all registered cron jobs.

Cron Jobs and Idempotency
Cron jobs are designed to perform periodic work, but beyond that, it is hard to know in advance what function they have. The variety of requirements that the diverse set of cron jobs entails obviously impacts reliability requirements.
Some cron jobs, such as garbage collection processes, are idempotent. In case of system malfunction, it is safe to launch such jobs multiple times. Other cron jobs, such as a process that sends out an email newsletter to a wide distribution,

should not be launched more than once.

To make matters more complicated, failure to launch is acceptable for some cron jobs but not for others. For example, a garbage collection cron job scheduled to run every five minutes may be able to skip one launch, but a payroll cron job scheduled to run once a month should not be skipped.
This large variety of cron jobs makes reasoning about failure modes difficult: in a system like the cron service, there is no single answer that fits every situation. In general, we favor skipping launches rather than risking double launches, as much as the infrastructure allows. This is because recovering from a skipped launch is more tenable than recovering from a double launch. Cron job owners can (and should!) monitor their cron jobs; for example, an owner might have the cron service expose state for its managed cron jobs, or set up independent monitoring of the effect of cron jobs. In case of a skipped launch, cron job owners can take action that appropriately matches the nature of the cron job. However, undoing a double launch, such as the previously mentioned newsletter example, may be difficult or even entirely impossible. Therefore, we prefer to "fail closed" to avoid systemically creating bad state.

Cron at Large Scale
Moving away from single machines toward large-scale deployments requires some fundamental rethinking of how to make cron work well in such an environment. Before presenting the details of the Google cron solution, we'll discuss those differences between small-scale and large-scale deployment, and describe what design changes large-scale deployments necessitated.

Extended Infrastructure

In its "regular" implementations, cron is limited to a single machine. Large-scale system deployments extend our cron solution to multiple machines.
Hosting your cron service on a single machine could be catastrophic in terms of reliability. Say this machine is located in a datacenter with exactly 1,000 machines. A failure of just 1/1000th of your available machines could knock out the entire cron service. For obvious reasons, this implementation is not acceptable.

To increase cron's reliability, we decouple processes from machines. If you want to run a service, simply specify the service requirements and which datacenter it should run in. The datacenter scheduling system (which itself should be reliable) determines the machine or machines on which to deploy your service, in addition to handling machine deaths. Launching a job in a datacenter then effectively turns into sending one or more RPCs to the datacenter scheduler.
This process is, however, not instantaneous. Discovering a dead machine entails health check timeouts, while rescheduling your service onto a different machine requires time to install software and start up the new process.
Because moving a process to a different machine can mean loss of any local state stored on the old machine (unless live migration is employed), and the rescheduling time may exceed the smallest scheduling interval of one minute, we need procedures in place to mitigate both data loss and excessive time requirements. To retain local state of the old machine, you might simply persist the state on a distributed filesystem such as GFS, and use this filesystem during startup to identify jobs that failed to launch due to rescheduling. However, this solution falls short in terms of timeliness expectations: if you run a cron job every five minutes, a one- to two-minute delay caused by the total overhead of cron system rescheduling is potentially unacceptably substantial. In this case, hot spares, which would be able to quickly jump in and resume operation, can significantly shorten this time window.

Extended Requirements

Single-machine systems typically just colocate all running processes with limited isolation. While containers are now commonplace, it's not necessary or common to use containers to isolate every single component of a service that's deployed on a single machine. Therefore, if cron were deployed on a single machine, crond and all the cron jobs it runs would likely not be isolated.
Deployment at datacenter scale commonly means deployment into containers that enforce isolation. Isolation is necessary because the base expectation is that independent processes running in the same datacenter should not negatively impact each other. In order to enforce that expectation, you should know the quantity of resources you need to acquire up front for any given process you want to run-both for the cron system and the jobs it launches. A cron job may be delayed if the datacenter does not have resources available to match the

demands of the cron job. Resource requirements, in addition to user demand for monitoring of cron job launches, means that we need to track the full state of our cron job launches, from the scheduled launch to termination.
Decoupling process launches from specific machines exposes the cron system to partial launch failure. The versatility of cron job configurations also means that launching a new cron job in a datacenter may need multiple RPCs, such that sometimes we encounter a scenario in which some RPCs succeeded but others did not (for example, because the process sending the RPCs died in the middle of executing these tasks). The cron recovery procedure must also account for this scenario.
In terms of the failure mode, a datacenter is a substantially more complex ecosystem than a single machine. The cron service that began as a relatively simple binary on a single machine now has many obvious and nonobvious dependencies when deployed at a larger scale. For a service as basic as cron, we want to ensure that even if the datacenter suffers a partial failure (for example, partial power outage or problems with storage services), the service is still able to function. By requiring that the datacenter scheduler locates replicas of cron in diverse locations within the datacenter, we avoid the scenario in which failure of a single power distribution unit takes out all the processes of the cron service.
It may be possible to deploy a single cron service across the globe, but deploying cron within a single datacenter has benefits: the service enjoys low latency and shares fate with the datacenter scheduler, cron's core dependency.

Building Cron at Google
This section address the problems that must be resolved in order to provide a large-scale distributed deployment of cron reliably. It also highlights some important decisions made in regards to distributed cron at Google.

Tracking the State of Cron Jobs

As discussed in previous sections, we need to hold some amount of state about cron jobs, and be able to restore that information quickly in case of failure. Moreover, the consistency of that state is paramount. Recall that many cron jobs, like a payroll run or sending an email newsletter, are not idempotent.

We have two options to track the state of cron jobs:

Store data externally in generally available distributed storage

Use a system that stores a small volume of state as part of the cron service itself
When designing the distributed cron, we chose the second option. We made this choice for several reasons:
Distributed filesystems such as GFS or HDFS often cater to the use case of very large files (for example, the output of web crawling programs), whereas the information we need to store about cron jobs is very small. Small writes on a distributed filesystem are very expensive and come with high latency, because the filesystem is not optimized for these types of writes.
Base services for which outages have wide impact (such as cron) should have very few dependencies. Even if parts of the datacenter go away, the cron service should be able to function for at least some amount of time. But this requirement does not mean that the storage has to be part of the cron process directly (how storage is handled is essentially an implementation detail). However, cron should be able to operate independently of downstream systems that cater to a large number of internal users.

The Use of Paxos

We deploy multiple replicas of the cron service and use the Paxos distributed consensus algorithm (see Managing Critical State: Distributed Consensus for Reliability) to ensure they have consistent state. As long as the majority of group members are available, the distributed system as a whole can successfully process new state changes despite the failure of bounded subsets of the infrastructure.
As shown in Figure 24-1, the distributed cron uses a single leader job, which is the only replica that can modify the shared state, as well as the only replica that can launch cron jobs. We take advantage of the fact that the variant of Paxos we use, Fast Paxos [Lam06], uses a leader replica internally as an optimization-the

Fast Paxos leader replica also acts as the cron service leader.


Figure 24-1. The interactions between distributed cron replicas

If the leader replica dies, the health-checking mechanism of the Paxos group discovers this event quickly (within seconds). As another cron process is already started up and available, we can elect a new leader. As soon as the new leader is elected, we follow a leader election protocol specific to the cron service, which is responsible for taking over all the work left unfinished by the previous leader. The leader specific to the cron service is the same as the Paxos leader, but the cron service needs to take additional action upon promotion. The fast reaction time for the leader re-election allows us to stay well within a generally tolerable one-minute failover time.
The most important state we keep in Paxos is information regarding which cron jobs are launched. We synchronously inform a quorum of replicas of the beginning and end of each scheduled launch for each cron job.

The Roles of the Leader and the Follower

As just described, our use of Paxos and its deployment in the cron service has two assigned roles: the leader and the follower. The following sections describe each role.

The leader

The leader replica is the only replica that actively launches cron jobs. The leader has an internal scheduler that, much like the simple crond described at the beginning of this chapter, maintains the list of cron jobs ordered by their scheduled launch time. The leader replica waits until the scheduled launch time of the first job.

Upon reaching the scheduled launch time, the leader replica announces that it is about to start this particular cron job's launch, and calculates the new scheduled launch time, just like a regular crond implementation would. Of course, as with regular crond, a cron job launch specification may have changed since the last execution, and this launch specification must be kept in sync with the followers as well. Simply identifying the cron job is not enough: we should also uniquely identify the particular launch using the start time; otherwise, ambiguity in cron job launch tracking may occur. (Such ambiguity is especially likely in the case of high-frequency cron jobs, such as those running every minute.) As seen in Figure 24-2, this communication is performed over Paxos.

It is important that Paxos communication remain synchronous, and that the actual cron job launch does not proceed until it receives confirmation that the Paxos quorum has received the launch notification. The cron service needs to understand whether each cron job has launched in order to decide the next course of action in case of leader failover. Not performing this task synchronously could mean that the entire cron job launch happens on the leader without informing the follower replicas. In case of failover, the follower replicas might attempt to perform the very same launch again because they aren't aware that the launch already occurred.



Figure 24-2. Illustration of progress of a cron job launch, from the leader's perspective
The completion of the cron job launch is announced via Paxos to the other replicas synchronously. Note that it does not matter whether the launch succeeded or failed for external reasons (for example, if the datacenter scheduler was unavailable). Here, we are simply keeping track of the fact that the cron service attempted the launch at the given scheduled time. We also need to be able to resolve failures of the cron system in the middle of this operation, as discussed in the following section.
Another extremely important feature of the leader is that as soon as it loses its leadership for any reason, it must immediately stop interacting with the datacenter scheduler. Holding the leadership should guarantee mutual exclusion of access to the datacenter scheduler. In the absence of this condition of mutual exclusion, the old and new leaders might perform conflicting actions on the datacenter scheduler.

The follower

The follower replicas keep track of the state of the world, as provided by the leader, in order to take over at a moment's notice if needed. All the state changes tracked by follower replicas are communicated via Paxos, from the leader

replica. Much like the leader, followers also maintain a list of all cron jobs in the system, and this list must be kept consistent among the replicas (through the use of Paxos).
Upon receiving notification about a commenced launch, the follower replica updates its local next scheduled launch time for the given cron job. This very important state change (which is performed synchronously) ensures that all cron job schedules within the system are consistent. We keep track of all open launches (launches that have begun but not completed).
If a leader replica dies or otherwise malfunctions (e.g., is partitioned away from the other replicas on the network), a follower should be elected as a new leader. The election must converge faster than one minute, in order to avoid the risk of missing or unreasonably delaying a cron job launch. Once a leader is elected, all open launches (i.e., partial failures) must be concluded. This process can be quite complicated, imposing additional requirements on both the cron system and the datacenter infrastructure. The following section discusses how to resolve partial failures of this type.

Resolving partial failures

As mentioned, the interaction between the leader replica and the datacenter scheduler can fail in between sending multiple RPCs that describe a single logical cron job launch. Our systems should be able to handle this condition.
Recall that every cron job launch has two synchronization points: When we are about to perform the launch
When we have finished the launch

These two points allow us to delimit the launch. Even if the launch consists of a single RPC, how do we know if the RPC was actually sent? Consider the case in which we know that the scheduled launch started, but we were not notified of its completion before the leader replica died.
In order to determine if the RPC was actually sent, one of the following conditions must be met:

All operations on external systems, which we may need to continue upon re-election, must be idempotent (i.e., we can safely perform the operations again)
We must be able to look up the state of all operations on external systems in order to unambiguously determine whether they completed or not
Each of these conditions imposes significant constraints, and may be difficult to implement, but being able to meet at least one of these conditions is fundamental to the accurate operation of a cron service in a distributed environment that could suffer a single or several partial failures. Not handling this appropriately can lead to missed launches or double launch of the same cron job.
Most infrastructure that launches logical jobs in datacenters (Mesos, for example) provides naming for those datacenter jobs, making it possible to look up the state of jobs, stop the jobs, or perform other maintenance. A reasonable solution to the idempotency problem is to construct job names ahead of time (thereby avoiding causing any mutating operations on the datacenter scheduler), and then distribute the names to all replicas of your cron service. If the cron service leader dies during launch, the new leader simply looks up the state of all the precomputed names and launches the missing names.
Note that, similar to our method of identifying individual cron job launches by their name and launch time, it is important that the constructed job names on the datacenter scheduler include the particular scheduled launch time (or have this information otherwise retrievable). In regular operation, the cron service should fail over quickly in case of leader failure, but a quick failover doesn't always happen.
Recall that we track the scheduled launch time when keeping the internal state between the replicas. Similarly, we need to disambiguate our interaction with the datacenter scheduler, also by using the scheduled launch time. For example, consider a short-lived but frequently run cron job. The cron job launches, but before the launch is communicated to all replicas, the leader crashes and an unusually long failover-long enough that the cron job finishes successfully- takes place. The new leader looks up the state of the cron job, observes its completion, and attempts to launch the job again. Had the launch time been included, the new leader would know that the job on the datacenter scheduler is the result of this particular cron job launch, and this double launch would not

have happened.

The actual implementation has a more complicated system for state lookup, driven by the implementation details of the underlying infrastructure. However, the preceding description covers the implementation-independent requirements of any such system. Depending on the available infrastructure, you may also need to consider the trade-off between risking a double launch and risking skipping a launch.

Storing the State

Using Paxos to achieve consensus is only one part of the problem of how to handle the state. Paxos is essentially a continuous log of state changes, appended to synchronously as state changes occur. This characteristic of Paxos has two implications:
The log needs to be compacted, to prevent it from growing infinitely The log itself must be stored somewhere
In order to prevent the infinite growth of the Paxos log, we can simply take a snapshot of the current state, which means that we can reconstruct the state without needing to replay all state change log entries leading to the current state. To provide an example: if our state changes stored in logs are "Increment a counter by 1," then after a thousand iterations, we have a thousand log entries that can be easily changed to a snapshot of "Set counter to 1,000."
In case of lost logs, we only lose the state since the last snapshot. Snapshots are in fact our most critical state-if we lose our snapshots, we essentially have to start from zero again because we've lost our internal state. Losing logs, on the other hand, just causes a bounded loss of state and sends the cron system back in time to the point when the latest snapshot was taken.
We have two main options for storing our data:

Externally in a generally available distributed storage

In a system that stores the small volume of state as part of the cron service itself

When designing the system, we combined elements of both options.

We store Paxos logs on local disk of the machine where cron service replicas are scheduled. Having three replicas in default operation implies that we have three copies of the logs. We store the snapshots on local disk as well. However, because they are critical, we also back them up onto a distributed filesystem, thus protecting against failures affecting all three machines.
We do not store logs on our distributed filesystem. We consciously decided that losing logs, which represent a small amount of the most recent state changes, is an acceptable risk. Storing logs on a distributed filesystem can entail a substantial performance penalty caused by frequent small writes. The simultaneous loss of all three machines is unlikely, and if simultaneous loss does occur, we automatically restore from the snapshot. We thereby lose only a small amount of logs: those taken since the last snapshot, which we perform on configurable intervals. Of course, these trade-offs may be different depending on the details of the infrastructure, as well as the requirements placed on the cron system.
In addition to the logs and snapshots stored on the local disk and snapshot backups on the distributed filesystem, a freshly started replica can fetch the state snapshot and all logs from an already running replica over the network. This ability makes replica startup independent of any state on the local machine. Therefore, rescheduling a replica to a different machine upon restart (or machine death) is essentially a nonissue for the reliability of the service.

Running Large Cron

There are other smaller but equally interesting implications of running a large cron deployment. A traditional cron is small: at most, it probably contains on the order of tens of cron jobs. However, if you run a cron service for thousands of machines in a datacenter, your usage will grow, and you may run into problems.
Beware the large and well-known problem of distributed systems: the thundering herd. Based on user configuration, the cron service can cause substantial spikes in datacenter usage. When people think of a "daily cron job," they commonly configure this job to run at midnight. This setup works just fine if the cron job launches on the same machine, but what if your cron job can spawn a MapReduce with thousands of workers? And what if 30 different teams decide

to run a daily cron job like this, in the same datacenter? To solve this problem, we introduced an extension to the crontab format.
In the ordinary crontab, users specify the minute, hour, day of the month (or week), and month when the cron job should launch, or asterisk to specify any value. Running at midnight, daily, would then have crontab specification of "0 0
* * *" (i.e., zero-th minute, zero-th hour, every day of the week, every month, and every day of the week). We also introduced the use of the question mark, which means that any value is acceptable, and the cron system is given the freedom to choose the value. Users choose this value by hashing the cron job configuration over the given time range (e.g., 0..23 for hour), therefore distributing those launches more evenly.
Despite this change, the load caused by the cron jobs is still very spiky. The graph in Figure 24-3 illustrates the aggregate global number of launches of cron jobs at Google. This graph highlights the frequent spikes in cron job launches, which is often caused by cron jobs that need to be launched at a specific time- for example, due to temporal dependency on external events.



Figure 24-3. The number of cron jobs launched globally

Summary
A cron service has been a fundamental feature in UNIX systems for many

decades. The industry move toward large distributed systems, in which a datacenter may be the smallest effective unit of hardware, requires changes in large portions of the stack. Cron is no exception to this trend. A careful look at the required properties of a cron service and the requirements of cron jobs drives Google's new design.
We have discussed the new constraints demanded by a distributed-system environment, and a possible design of the cron service based on Google's solution. This solution requires strong consistency guarantees in the distributed environment. The core of the distributed cron implementation is therefore Paxos, a commonplace algorithm to reach consensus in an unreliable environment. The use of Paxos and correct analysis of new failure modes of cron jobs in a large- scale, distributed environment allowed us to build a robust cron service that is heavily used in Google.

114This chapter was previously published in part in ACM Queue (March 2015, vol. 13, issue 3).

115Failure of individual jobs is beyond the scope of this analysis.

Chapter 25 - Data Processing Pipelines
Written by Dan DennisonEdited by Tim Harvey

This chapter focuses on the real-life challenges of managing data processing pipelines of depth and complexity. It considers the frequency continuum between periodic pipelines that run very infrequently through to continuous pipelines that never stop running, and discusses the discontinuities that can produce significant operational problems. A fresh take on the leader-follower model is presented as a more reliable and better-scaling alternative to the periodic pipeline for processing Big Data.

Origin of the Pipeline Design Pattern
The classic approach to data processing is to write a program that reads in data, transforms it in some desired way, and outputs new data. Typically, the program is scheduled to run under the control of a periodic scheduling program such as cron. This design pattern is called a data pipeline. Data pipelines go as far back as co-routines [Con63], the DTSS communication files [Bul80], the UNIX pipe
[McI86], and later, ETL pipelines,116 but such pipelines have gained increased attention with the rise of "Big Data," or "datasets that are so large and so complex that traditional data processing applications are inadequate."117
Initial Effect of Big Data on the Simple Pipeline Pattern
Programs that perform periodic or continuous transformations on Big Data are usually referred to as "simple, one-phase pipelines."
Given the scale and processing complexity inherent to Big Data, programs are typically organized into a chained series, with the output of one program becoming the input to the next. There may be varied rationales for this arrangement, but it is typically designed for ease of reasoning about the system

and not usually geared toward operational efficiency. Programs organized this way are called multiphase pipelines, because each program in the chain acts as a discrete data processing phase.
The number of programs chained together in series is a measurement known as the depth of a pipeline. Thus, a shallow pipeline may only have one program with a corresponding pipeline depth measurement of one, whereas a deep pipeline may have a pipeline depth in the tens or hundreds of programs.

Challenges with the Periodic Pipeline Pattern
Periodic pipelines are generally stable when there are sufficient workers for the volume of data and execution demand is within computational capacity. In addition, instabilities such as processing bottlenecks are avoided when the number of chained jobs and the relative throughput between jobs remain uniform.
Periodic pipelines are useful and practical, and we run them on a regular basis at Google. They are written with frameworks like MapReduce [Dea04] and Flume [Cha10], among others.
However, the collective SRE experience has been that the periodic pipeline model is fragile. We discovered that when a periodic pipeline is first installed with worker sizing, periodicity, chunking technique, and other parameters carefully tuned, performance is initially reliable. However, organic growth and change inevitably begin to stress the system, and problems arise. Examples of such problems include jobs that exceed their run deadline, resource exhaustion, and hanging processing chunks that entail corresponding operational load.

Trouble Caused By Uneven Work Distribution
The key breakthrough of Big Data is the widespread application of "embarrassingly parallel" [Mol86] algorithms to cut a large workload into chunks small enough to fit onto individual machines. Sometimes chunks require an uneven amount of resources relative to one another, and it is seldom initially obvious why particular chunks require different amounts of resources. For example, in a workload that is partitioned by customer, data chunks for some customers may be much larger than others. Because the customer is the point of

indivisibility, end-to-end runtime is thus capped to the runtime of the largest customer.
The "hanging chunk" problem can result when resources are assigned due to differences between machines in a cluster or overallocation to a job. This problem arises due to the difficulty of some real-time operations on streams such as sorting "steaming" data. The pattern of typical user code is to wait for the total computation to complete before progressing to the next pipeline stage, commonly because sorting may be involved, which requires all data to proceed. That can significantly delay pipeline completion time, because completion is blocked on the worst-case performance as dictated by the chunking methodology in use.
If this problem is detected by engineers or cluster monitoring infrastructure, the response can make matters worse. For example, the "sensible" or "default" response to a hanging chunk is to immediately kill the job and then allow the job to restart, because the blockage may well be the result of nondeterministic factors. However, because pipeline implementations by design usually don't include checkpointing, work on all chunks is restarted from the beginning, thereby wasting the time, CPU cycles, and human effort invested in the previous cycle.

Drawbacks of Periodic Pipelines in Distributed Environments
Big Data periodic pipelines are widely used at Google, and so Google's cluster management solution includes an alternative scheduling mechanism for such pipelines. This mechanism is necessary because, unlike continuously running pipelines, periodic pipelines typically run as lower-priority batch jobs. A lower- priority designation works well in this case because batch work is not sensitive to latency in the same way that Internet-facing web services are. In addition, in order to control cost by maximizing machine workload, Borg (Google's cluster management system, [Ver15]) assigns batch work to available machines. This priority can result in degraded startup latency, so pipeline jobs can potentially experience open-ended startup delays.
Jobs invoked through this mechanism have a number of natural limitations, resulting in various distinct behaviors. For example, jobs scheduled in the gaps

left by user-facing web service jobs might be impacted in terms of availability of low-latency resources, pricing, and stability of access to resources. Execution cost is inversely proportional to requested startup delay, and directly proportional to resources consumed. Although batch scheduling may work smoothly in practice, excessive use of the batch scheduler (Distributed Periodic Scheduling with Cron) places jobs at risk of preemptions (see section 2.5 of [Ver15]) when cluster load is high because other users are starved of batch resources. In light of the risk trade-offs, running a well-tuned periodic pipeline successfully is a delicate balance between high resource cost and risk of preemptions.
Delays of up to a few hours might well be acceptable for pipelines that run daily. However, as the scheduled execution frequency increases, the minimum time between executions can quickly reach the minimum average delay point, placing a lower bound on the latency that a periodic pipeline can expect to attain. Reducing the job execution interval below this effective lower bound simply results in undesirable behavior rather than increased progress. The specific failure mode depends on the batch scheduling policy in use. For example, each new run might stack up on the cluster scheduler because the previous run is not complete. Even worse, the currently executing and nearly finished run could be killed when the next execution is scheduled to begin, completely halting all progress in the name of increasing executions.
Note where the downward-sloping idle interval line intersects the scheduling delay in Figure 25-1. In this scenario, lowering the execution interval much below 40 minutes for this ~20-minute job results in potentially overlapping executions with undesired consequences.


Figure 25-1. Periodic pipeline execution interval versus idle time (log scale)

The solution to this problem is to secure sufficient server capacity for proper operation. However, resource acquisition in a shared, distributed environment is subject to supply and demand. As expected, development teams tend to be reluctant to go through the processes of acquiring resources when the resources must be contributed to a common pool and shared. To resolve this, a distinction between batch scheduling resources versus production priority resources has to be made to rationalize resource acquisition costs.

Monitoring Problems in Periodic Pipelines

For pipelines of sufficient execution duration, having real-time information on runtime performance metrics can be as important, if not even more important, than knowing overall metrics. This is because real-time data is important to providing operational support, including emergency response. In practice, the standard monitoring model involves collecting metrics during job execution, and reporting metrics only upon completion. If the job fails during execution, no statistics are provided.
Continuous pipelines do not share these problems because their tasks are constantly running and their telemetry is routinely designed so that real-time metrics are available. Periodic pipelines shouldn't have inherent monitoring problems, but we have observed a strong association.

"Thundering Herd" Problems

Adding to execution and monitoring challenges is the "thundering herd" problem endemic to distributed systems, also discussed in Distributed Periodic Scheduling with Cron. Given a large enough periodic pipeline, for each cycle, potentially thousands of workers immediately start work. If there are too many workers or if the workers are misconfigured or invoked by faulty retry logic, the servers on which they run will be overwhelmed, as will the underlying shared cluster services, and any networking infrastructure that was being used will also be overwhelmed.
Further worsening this situation, if retry logic is not implemented, correctness problems can result when work is dropped upon failure, and the job won't be retried. If retry logic is present but it is naive or poorly implemented, retry upon failure can compound the problem.
Human intervention can also contribute to this scenario. Engineers with limited experience managing pipelines tend to amplify this problem by adding more workers to their pipeline when the job fails to complete within a desired period of time.
Regardless of the source of the "thundering herd" problem, nothing is harder on cluster infrastructure and the SREs responsible for a cluster's various services than a buggy 10,000 worker pipeline job.

Moir� Load Pattern

Sometimes the thundering herd problem may not be obvious to spot in isolation. A related problem we call "Moir� load pattern" occurs when two or more pipelines run simultaneously and their execution sequences occasionally overlap, causing them to simultaneously consume a common shared resource. This problem can occur even in continuous pipelines, although it is less common when load arrives more evenly.
Moir� load patterns are most apparent in plots of pipeline usage of shared resources. For example, Figure 25-2 identifies the resource usage of three periodic pipelines. In Figure 25-3, which is a stacked version of the data of the previous graph, the peak impact causing on-call pain occurs when the aggregate load nears 1.2M.


Figure	25-2.	Moir�	load	pattern	in	separate	infrastructure


Figure 25-3. Moir� load pattern in shared infrastructure

Introduction to Google Workflow
When an inherently one-shot batch pipeline is overwhelmed by business demands for continuously updated results, the pipeline development team usually considers either refactoring the original design to satisfy current demands, or moving to a continuous pipeline model. Unfortunately, business demands usually occur at the least convenient time to refactor the pipeline system into an online continuous processing system. Newer and larger customers who are faced with forcing scaling issues typically also want to include new features, and expect that these requirements adhere to immovable deadlines. In anticipating this challenge, it's important to ascertain several details at the outset of designing a system involving a proposed data pipeline. Be sure to scope
expected growth trajectory,118 demand for design modifications, expected additional resources, and expected latency requirements from the business.

Faced with these needs, Google developed a system in 2003 called "Workflow" that makes continuous processing available at scale. Workflow uses the leader- follower (workers) distributed systems design pattern [Sha00] and the system prevalence  design  pattern.119  This  combination  enables  very  large-scale
transactional data pipelines, ensuring correctness with exactly-once semantics.

Workflow as Model-View-Controller Pattern

Because of how system prevalence works, it can be useful to think of Workflow as the distributed systems equivalent of the model-view-controller pattern known from user interface development.120 As shown in Figure 25-4, this design pattern divides a given software application into three interconnected parts to separate
internal representations of information from the ways that information is presented to or accepted from the user.121

Figure 25-4. The model-view-controller pattern used in user interface design

Adapting this pattern for Workflow, the model is held in a server called "Task Master." The Task Master uses the system prevalence pattern to hold all job states in memory for fast availability while synchronously journaling mutations to persistent disk. The view is the workers that continually update the system state transactionally with the master according to their perspective as a subcomponent of the pipeline. Although all pipeline data may be stored in the

Task Master, the best performance is usually achieved when only pointers to work are stored in the Task Master, and the actual input and output data is stored in a common filesystem or other storage. Supporting this analogy, the workers are completely stateless and can be discarded at any time. A controller can optionally be added as a third system component to efficiently support a number of auxiliary system activities that affect the pipeline, such as runtime scaling of the pipeline, snapshotting, workcycle state control, rolling back pipeline state, or even performing global interdiction for business continuity. Figure 25-5 illustrates the design pattern.

Figure 25-5. The model-view-controller design pattern as adapted for Google Workflow

Stages of Execution in Workflow
We can increase pipeline depth to any level inside Workflow by subdividing processing into task groups held in the Task Master. Each task group holds the work corresponding to a pipeline stage that can perform arbitrary operations on some piece of data. It's relatively straightforward to perform mapping, shuffling, sorting, splitting, merging, or any other operation in any stage.
A stage usually has some worker type associated with it. There can be multiple concurrent instances of a given worker type, and workers can be self-scheduled in the sense that they can look for different types of work and choose which type

to perform.

The worker consumes work units from a previous stage and produces output units. The output can be an end point or input for some other processing stage. Within the system, it's easy to guarantee that all work is executed, or at least reflected in permanent state, exactly once.

Workflow Correctness Guarantees

It's not practical to store every detail of the pipeline's state inside the Task Master, because the Task Master is limited by RAM size. However, a double correctness guarantee persists because the master holds a collection of pointers to uniquely named data, and each work unit has a uniquely held lease. Workers acquire work with a lease and may only commit work from tasks for which they currently possess a valid lease.
To avoid the situation in which an orphaned worker may continue working on a work unit, thus destroying the work of the current worker, each output file opened by a worker has a unique name. In this way, even orphaned workers can continue writing independently of the master until they attempt to commit. Upon attempting a commit, they will be unable to do so because another worker holds the lease for that work unit. Furthermore, orphaned workers cannot destroy the work produced by a valid worker, because the unique filename scheme ensures that every worker is writing to a distinct file. In this way, the double correctness guarantee holds: the output files are always unique, and the pipeline state is always correct by virtue of tasks with leases.
As if a double correctness guarantee isn't enough, Workflow also versions all tasks. If the task updates or the task lease changes, each operation yields a new unique task replacing the previous one, with a new ID assigned to the task. Because all pipeline configuration in Workflow is stored inside the Task Master in the same form as the work units themselves, in order to commit work, a worker must own an active lease and reference the task ID number of the configuration it used to produce its result. If the configuration changed while the work unit was in flight, all workers of that type will be unable to commit despite owning current leases. Thus, all work performed after a configuration change is consistent with the new configuration, at the cost of work being thrown away by workers unfortunate enough to hold the old leases.

These measures provide a triple correctness guarantee: configuration, lease ownership, and filename uniqueness. However, even this isn't sufficient for all cases.
For example, what if the Task Master's network address changed, and a different Task Master replaced it at the same address? What if a memory corruption altered the IP address or port number, resulting in another Task Master on the other end? Even more commonly, what if someone (mis)configured their Task Master setup by inserting a load balancer in front of a set of independent Task Masters?
Workflow embeds a server token, a unique identifier for this particular Task Master, in each task's metadata to prevent a rogue or incorrectly configured Task Master from corrupting the pipeline. Both client and server check the token on each operation, avoiding a very subtle misconfiguration in which all operations run smoothly until a task identifier collision occurs.
To summarize, the four Workflow correctness guarantees are:

Worker output through configuration tasks creates barriers on which to predicate work.
All work committed requires a currently valid lease held by the worker. Output files are uniquely named by the workers.
The client and server validate the Task Master itself by checking a server token on every operation.
At this point, it may occur to you that it would be simpler to forgo the specialized Task Master and use Spanner [Cor12] or another database. However, Workflow is special because each task is unique and immutable. These twin properties prevent many potentially subtle issues with wide-scale work distribution from occurring.
For example, the lease obtained by the worker is part of the task itself, requiring a brand new task even for lease changes. If a database is used directly and its transaction logs act like a "journal," each and every read must be part of a long- running transaction. This configuration is most certainly possible, but terribly inefficient.

Ensuring Business Continuity

Big Data pipelines need to continue processing despite failures of all types, including fiber cuts, weather events, and cascading power grid failures. These types of failures can disable entire datacenters. In addition, pipelines that do not employ system prevalence to obtain strong guarantees about job completion are often disabled and enter an undefined state. This architecture gap makes for a brittle business continuity strategy, and entails costly mass duplication of effort to restore pipelines and data.
Workflow resolves this problem conclusively for continuous processing pipelines. To obtain global consistency, the Task Master stores journals on Spanner, using it as a globally available, globally consistent, but low-throughput filesystem. To determine which Task Master can write, each Task Master uses the distributed lock service called Chubby [Bur06] to elect the writer, and the result is persisted in Spanner. Finally, clients look up the current Task Master using internal naming services.
Because Spanner does not make for a high-throughput filesystem, globally distributed Workflows employ two or more local Workflows running in distinct clusters, in addition to a notion of reference tasks stored in the global Workflow. As units of work (tasks) are consumed through a pipeline, equivalent reference tasks are inserted into the global Workflow by the binary labeled "stage 1" in Figure 25-6. As tasks finish, the reference tasks are transactionally removed from the global Workflow as depicted in "stage n" of Figure 25-6. If the tasks cannot be removed from the global Workflow, the local Workflow will block until the global Workflow becomes available again, ensuring transactional correctness.
To automate failover, a helper binary labeled "stage 1" in Figure 25-6 runs inside each local Workflow. The local Workflow is otherwise unaltered, as described by the "do work" box in the diagram. This helper binary acts as a "controller" in the MVC sense, and is responsible for creating reference tasks, as well as updating a special heartbeat task inside of the global Workflow. If the heartbeat task is not updated within the timeout period, the remote Workflow's helper binary seizes the work in progress as documented by the reference tasks and the pipeline continues, unhindered by whatever the environment may do to the work.


Figure 25-6. An example of distributed data and process flow using Workflow pipelines

Summary and Concluding Remarks
Periodic pipelines are valuable. However, if a data processing problem is continuous or will organically grow to become continuous, don't use a periodic pipeline. Instead, use a technology with characteristics similar to Workflow.
We have found that continuous data processing with strong guarantees, as provided by Workflow, performs and scales well on distributed cluster infrastructure, routinely produces results that users can rely upon, and is a stable and reliable system for the Site Reliability Engineering team to manage and maintain.

116Wikipedia:	Extract,	transform,	load,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extract,_transform,_load

117Wikipedia: Big data, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_data
118Jeff Dean's lecture on "Software Engineering Advice from Building Large- Scale Distributed Systems" is an excellent resource: [Dea07].

119Wikipedia:	System	Prevalence,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/System_Prevalence

120The "model-view-controller" pattern is an analogy for distributed systems that was very loosely borrowed from Smalltalk, which was originally used to describe the design structure of graphical user interfaces [Fow08].

121Wikipedia:	Model-view-controller,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model%E2%80%93view%E2%80%93controller

Chapter 26 - Data Integrity: What You Read Is What You Wrote
Written by Raymond Blum and Rhandeev SinghEdited by Betsy Beyer

What is "data integrity"? When users come first, data integrity is whatever users think it is.
We might say data integrity is a measure of the accessibility and accuracy of the datastores needed to provide users with an adequate level of service. But this definition is insufficient.
For instance, if a user interface bug in Gmail displays an empty mailbox for too long, users might believe data has been lost. Thus, even if no data was actually lost, the world would question Google's ability to act as a responsible steward of data, and the viability of cloud computing would be threatened. Were Gmail to display an error or maintenance message for too long while "only a bit of metadata" is repaired, the trust of Google's users would similarly erode.
How long is "too long" for data to be unavailable? As demonstrated by an actual Gmail incident in 2011 [Hic11], four days is a long time-perhaps "too long." Subsequently, we believe 24 hours is a good starting point for establishing the threshold of "too long" for Google Apps.
Similar reasoning applies to applications like Google Photos, Drive, Cloud Storage, and Cloud Datastore, because users don't necessarily draw a distinction between these discrete products (reasoning, "this product is still Google" or "Google, Amazon, whatever; this product is still part of the cloud"). Data loss, data corruption, and extended unavailability are typically indistinguishable to users. Therefore, data integrity applies to all types of data across all services. When considering data integrity, what matters is that services in the cloud remain accessible to users. User access to data is especially important.

Data Integrity's Strict Requirements

When considering the reliability needs of a given system, it may seem that uptime (service availability) needs are stricter than those of data integrity. For example, users may find an hour of email downtime unacceptable, whereas they may live grumpily with a four-day time window to recover a mailbox. However, there's a more appropriate way to consider the demands of uptime versus data integrity.
An SLO of 99.99% uptime leaves room for only an hour of downtime in a whole year. This SLO sets a rather high bar, which likely exceeds the expectations of most Internet and Enterprise users.
In contrast, an SLO of 99.99% good bytes in a 2 GB artifact would render documents, executables, and databases corrupt (up to 200 KB garbled). This amount of corruption is catastrophic in the majority of cases-resulting in executables with random opcodes and completely unloadable databases.
From the user perspective, then, every service has independent uptime and data integrity requirements, even if these requirements are implicit. The worst time to disagree with users about these requirements is after the demise of their data!

Figure 26-1.

To revise our earlier definition of data integrity, we might say that data integrity means that services in the cloud remain accessible to users. User access to data is especially important, so this access should remain in perfect shape.
Now, suppose an artifact were corrupted or lost exactly once a year. If the loss were unrecoverable, uptime of the affected artifact is lost for that year. The most likely means to avoid any such loss is through proactive detection, coupled with rapid repair.
In an alternate universe, suppose the corruption were immediately detected before users were affected and that the artifact was removed, fixed, and returned to service within half an hour. Ignoring any other downtime during that 30

minutes, such an object would be 99.99% available that year.

Astonishingly, at least from the user perspective, in this scenario, data integrity is still 100% (or close to 100%) during the accessible lifetime of the object. As demonstrated by this example, the secret to superior data integrity is proactive detection and rapid repair and recovery.

Choosing a Strategy for Superior Data Integrity

There are many possible strategies for rapid detection, repair, and recovery of lost data. All of these strategies trade uptime against data integrity with respect to affected users. Some strategies work better than others, and some strategies require more complex engineering investment than others. With so many options available, which strategies should you utilize? The answer depends on your computing paradigm.
Most cloud computing applications seek to optimize for some combination of uptime, latency, scale, velocity, and privacy. To provide a working definition for each of these terms:
Uptime

Also referred to as availability, the proportion of time a service is usable by its users.
Latency

How responsive a service appears to its users.

Scale

A service's volume of users and the mixture of workloads the service can handle before latency suffers or the service falls apart.
Velocity

How fast a service can innovate to provide users with superior value at reasonable cost.
Privacy

This concept imposes complex requirements. As a simplification, this chapter limits its scope in discussing privacy to data deletion: data must be destroyed within a reasonable time after users delete it.

Many cloud applications continually evolve atop a mixture of ACID122 and BASE123 APIs to meet the demands of these five components.124 BASE allows for higher availability than ACID, in exchange for a softer distributed consistency guarantee. Specifically, BASE only guarantees that once a piece of
data is no longer updated, its value will eventually become consistent across (potentially distributed) storage locations.
The following scenario provides an example of how trade-offs between uptime, latency, scale, velocity, and privacy might play out.
When velocity trumps other requirements, the resulting applications rely on an arbitrary collection of APIs that are most familiar to the particular developers working on the application.

For example, an application may take advantage of an efficient BLOB125 storage API, such as Blobstore, that neglects distributed consistency in favor of scaling to heavy workloads with high uptime, low latency, and at low cost. To compensate:
The same application may entrust small amounts of authoritative metadata pertaining to its blobs to a higher latency, less available, more costly Paxos- based service such as Megastore [Bak11], [Lam98].
Certain clients of the application may cache some of that metadata locally and access blobs directly, shaving latency still further from the vantage point of users.
Another application may keep metadata in Bigtable, sacrificing strong distributed consistency because its developers happened to be familiar with Bigtable.
Such cloud applications face a variety of data integrity challenges at runtime, such as referential integrity between datastores (in the preceding example, Blobstore, Megastore, and client-side caches). The vagaries of high velocity dictate that schema changes, data migrations, the piling of new features atop old features, rewrites, and evolving integration points with other applications collude to produce an environment riddled with complex relationships between various

pieces of data that no single engineer fully groks.

To prevent such an application's data from degrading before its users' eyes, a system of out-of-band checks and balances is needed within and between its datastores. Third Layer: Early Detection discusses such a system.
In addition, if such an application relies on independent, uncoordinated backups of several datastores (in the preceding example, Blobstore and Megastore), then its ability to make effective use of restored data during a data recovery effort is complicated by the variety of relationships between restored and live data. Our example application would have to sort through and distinguish between restored blobs versus live Megastore, restored Megastore versus live blobs, restored blobs versus restored Megastore, and interactions with client-side caches.
In consideration of these dependencies and complications, how many resources should be invested in data integrity efforts, and where?

Backups Versus Archives

Traditionally, companies "protect" data against loss by investing in backup strategies. However, the real focus of such backup efforts should be data recovery, which distinguishes real backups from archives. As is sometimes observed: No one really wants to make backups; what people really want are restores.
Is your "backup" really an archive, rather than appropriate for use in disaster recovery?

Figure 26-2.

The most important difference between backups and archives is that backups can be loaded back into an application, while archives cannot. Therefore, backups and archives have quite differing use cases.

Archives safekeep data for long periods of time to meet auditing, discovery, and compliance needs. Data recovery for such purposes generally doesn't need to complete within uptime requirements of a service. For example, you might need to retain financial transaction data for seven years. To achieve this goal, you could move accumulated audit logs to long-term archival storage at an offsite location once a month. Retrieving and recovering the logs during a month-long financial audit may take a week, and this weeklong time window for recovery may be acceptable for an archive.
On the other hand, when disaster strikes, data must be recovered from real backups quickly, preferably well within the uptime needs of a service. Otherwise, affected users are left without useful access to the application from the onset of the data integrity issue until the completion of the recovery effort.
It's also important to consider that because the most recent data is at risk until safely backed up, it may be optimal to schedule real backups (as opposed to archives) to occur daily, hourly, or more frequently, using full and incremental or continuous (streaming) approaches.
Therefore, when formulating a backup strategy, consider how quickly you need to be able to recover from a problem, and how much recent data you can afford to lose.

Requirements of the Cloud Environment in Perspective

Cloud environments introduce a unique combination of technical challenges:

If the environment uses a mixture of transactional and nontransactional backup and restore solutions, recovered data won't necessarily be correct.
If services must evolve without going down for maintenance, different versions of business logic may act on data in parallel.
If interacting services are versioned independently, incompatible versions of different services may interact momentarily, further increasing the chance of accidental data corruption or data loss.
In addition, in order to maintain economy of scale, service providers must provide only a limited number of APIs. These APIs must be simple and easy to use for the vast majority of applications, or few customers will use them. At the same time, the APIs must be robust enough to understand the following:

Data locality and caching
Local and global data distribution Strong and/or eventual consistency Data durability, backup, and recovery
Otherwise, sophisticated customers can't migrate applications to the cloud, and simple applications that grow complex and large will need complete rewrites in order to use different, more complex APIs.
Problems arise when the preceding API features are used in certain combinations. If the service provider doesn't solve these problems, then the applications that run into these challenges must identify and solve them independently.

Google SRE Objectives in Maintaining Data Integrity and Availability
While SRE's goal of "maintaining integrity of persistent data" is a good vision, we thrive on concrete objectives with measurable indicators. SRE defines key metrics that we use to set expectations for the capabilities of our systems and processes through tests and to track their performance during an actual event.

Data Integrity Is the Means; Data Availability Is the Goal

Data integrity refers to the accuracy and consistency of data throughout its lifetime. Users need to know that information will be correct and won't change in some unexpected way from the time it's first recorded to the last time it's observed. But is such assurance enough?
Consider the case of an email provider who suffered a weeklong data outage [Kinc09]. Over the space of 10 days, users had to find other, temporary methods of conducting their business with the expectation that they'd soon return to their established email accounts, identities, and accumulated histories.
Then, the worst possible news arrived: the provider announced that despite earlier expectations, the trove of past email and contacts was in fact gone- evaporated and never to be seen again. It seemed that a series of mishaps in managing data integrity had conspired to leave the service provider with no

usable backups. Furious users either stuck with their interim identities or established new identities, abandoning their troubled former email provider.
But wait! Several days after the declaration of absolute loss, the provider announced that the users' personal information could be recovered. There was no data loss; this was only an outage. All was well!
Except, all was not well. User data had been preserved, but the data was not accessible by the people who needed it for too long.
The moral of this example: From the user's point of view, data integrity without expected and regular data availability is effectively the same as having no data at all.

Delivering a Recovery System, Rather Than a Backup System

Making backups is a classically neglected, delegated, and deferred task of system administration. Backups aren't a high priority for anyone-they're an ongoing drain on time and resources, and yield no immediate visible benefit. For this reason, a lack of diligence in implementing a backup strategy is typically met with a sympathetic eye roll. One might argue that, like most measures of protection against low-risk dangers, such an attitude is pragmatic. The fundamental problem with this lackadaisical strategy is that the dangers it entails may be low risk, but they are also high impact. When your service's data is unavailable, your response can make or break your service, product, and even your company.
Instead of focusing on the thankless job of taking a backup, it's much more useful, not to mention easier, to motivate participation in taking backups by concentrating on a task with a visible payoff: the restore! Backups are a tax, one paid on an ongoing basis for the municipal service of guaranteed data availability. Instead of emphasizing the tax, draw attention to the service the tax funds: data availability. We don't make teams "practice" their backups, instead:
Teams define service level objectives (SLOs) for data availability in a variety of failure modes.
A team practices and demonstrates their ability to meet those SLOs.

Types of Failures That Lead to Data Loss

As illustrated by Figure 26-3, at a very high level, there are 24 distinct types of failures when the 3 factors can occur in any combination. You should consider each of these potential failures when designing a data integrity program. The factors of data integrity failure modes are as follows:
An unrecoverable loss of data may be caused by a number of factors: user action, operator error, application bugs, defects in infrastructure, faulty hardware, or site catastrophes.
Scope

Some losses are widespread, affecting many entities. Some losses are narrow and directed, deleting or corrupting data specific to a small subset of users.


Rate



Some data losses are a big bang event (for example, 1 million rows are replaced by only 10 rows in a single minute), whereas some data losses are creeping (for example, 10 rows of data are deleted every minute over the course of weeks).



Figure 26-3. The factors of data integrity failure modes

An effective restore plan must account for any of these failure modes occurring in any conceivable combination. What may be a perfectly effective strategy for guarding against a data loss caused by a creeping application bug may be of no help whatsoever when your colocation datacenter catches fire.

A study of 19 data recovery efforts at Google found that the most common user- visible data loss scenarios involved data deletion or loss of referential integrity caused by software bugs. The most challenging variants involved low-grade corruption or deletion that was discovered weeks to months after the bugs were first released into the production environment. Therefore, the safeguards Google employs should be well suited to prevent or recover from these types of loss.
To recover from such scenarios, a large and successful application needs to retrieve data for perhaps millions of users spread across days, weeks, or months. The application may also need to recover each affected artifact to a unique point in time. This data recovery scenario is called "point-in-time recovery" outside Google, and "time-travel" inside Google.
A backup and recovery solution that provides point-in-time recovery for an application across its ACID and BASE datastores while meeting strict uptime, latency, scalability, velocity, and cost goals is a chimera today!
Solving this problem with your own engineers entails sacrificing velocity. Many projects compromise by adopting a tiered backup strategy without point-in-time recovery. For instance, the APIs beneath your application may support a variety of data recovery mechanisms. Expensive local "snapshots" may provide limited protection from application bugs and offer quick restoration functionality, so you might retain a few days of such local "snapshots," taken several hours apart. Cost-effective full and incremental copies every two days may be retained longer. Point-in-time recovery is a very nice feature to have if one or more of these strategies support it.
Consider the data recovery options provided by the cloud APIs you are about to use. Trade point-in-time recovery against a tiered strategy if necessary, but don't resort to not using either! If you can have both features, use both features. Each of these features (or both) will be valuable at some point.

Challenges of Maintaining Data Integrity Deep and Wide

In designing a data integrity program, it's important to recognize that replication and redundancy are not recoverability.

Scaling issues: Fulls, incrementals, and the competing forces of backups and restores

A classic but flawed response to the question "Do you have a backup?" is "We have something even better than a backup-replication!" Replication provides many benefits, including locality of data and protection from a site-specific disaster, but it can't protect you from many sources of data loss. Datastores that automatically sync multiple replicas guarantee that a corrupt database row or errant delete are pushed to all of your copies, likely before you can isolate the problem.
To address this concern, you might make nonserving copies of your data in some other format, such as frequent database exports to a native file. This additional measure adds protection from the types of errors replication doesn't protect against-user errors and application-layer bugs-but does nothing to guard against losses introduced at a lower layer. This measure also introduces a risk of bugs during data conversion (in both directions) and during storage of the native file, in addition to possible mismatches in semantics between the two formats.
Imagine a zero-day attack126 at some low level of your stack, such as the filesystem or device driver. Any copies that rely on the compromised software component, including the database exports that were written to the same filesystem that backs your database, are vulnerable.
Thus, we see that diversity is key: protecting against a failure at layer X requires storing data on diverse components at that layer. Media isolation protects against media flaws: a bug or attack in a disk device driver is unlikely to affect tape drives. If we could, we'd make backup copies of our valuable data on clay
tablets.127
The forces of data freshness and restore completion compete against comprehensive protection. The further down the stack you push a snapshot of your data, the longer it takes to make a copy, which means that the frequency of copies decreases. At the database level, a transaction may take on the order of seconds to replicate. Exporting a database snapshot to the filesystem underneath may take 40 minutes. A full backup of the underlying filesystem may take hours.
In this scenario, you may lose up to 40 minutes of the most recent data when you restore the latest snapshot. A restore from the filesystem backup might incur hours of missing transactions. Additionally, restoring probably takes as long as backing up, so actually loading the data might take hours. You'd obviously like to have the freshest data back as quickly as possible, but depending on the type of failure, that freshest and most immediately available copy might not be an

option.

Retention

Retention-how long you keep copies of your data around-is yet another factor to consider in your data recovery plans.
While it's likely that you or your customers will quickly notice the sudden emptying of an entire database, it might take days for a more gradual loss of data to attract the right person's attention. Restoring the lost data in the latter scenario requires snapshots taken further back in time. When reaching back this far, you'll likely want to merge the restored data with the current state. Doing so significantly complicates the restore process.

How Google SRE Faces the Challenges of Data Integrity
Similar to our assumption that Google's underlying systems are prone to failure, we assume that any of our protection mechanisms are also subject to the same forces and can fail in the same ways and at the most inconvenient of times. Maintaining a guarantee of data integrity at large scale, a challenge that is further complicated by the high rate of change of the involved software systems, requires a number of complementary but uncoupled practices, each chosen to offer a high degree of protection on its own.

The 24 Combinations of Data Integrity Failure Modes

Given the many ways data can be lost (as described previously), there is no silver bullet that guards against the many combinations of failure modes. Instead, you need defense in depth. Defense in depth comprises multiple layers, with each successive layer of defense conferring protection from progressively less common data loss scenarios. Figure 26-4 illustrates an object's journey from soft deletion to destruction, and the data recovery strategies that should be employed along this journey to ensure defense in depth.
The first layer is soft deletion (or "lazy deletion" in the case of developer API offerings), which has proven to be an effective defense against inadvertent data deletion scenarios. The second line of defense is backups and their related

recovery methods. The third and final layer is regular data validation, covered in Third Layer: Early Detection. Across all these layers, the presence of replication is occasionally useful for data recovery in specific scenarios (although data recovery plans should not rely upon replication).

Figure 26-4. An object's journey from soft deletion to destruction

First Layer: Soft Deletion

When velocity is high and privacy matters, bugs in applications account for the vast majority of data loss and corruption events. In fact, data deletion bugs may become so common that the ability to undelete data for a limited time becomes the primary line of defense against the majority of otherwise permanent, inadvertent data loss.
Any product that upholds the privacy of its users must allow the users to delete selected subsets and/or all of their data. Such products incur a support burden due to accidental deletion. Giving users the ability to undelete their data (for example, via a trash folder) reduces but cannot completely eliminate this support burden, particularly if your service also supports third-party add-ons that can also delete data.
Soft deletion can dramatically reduce or even completely eliminate this support burden. Soft deletion means that deleted data is immediately marked as such, rendering it unusable by all but the application's administrative code paths. Administrative code paths may include legal discovery, hijacked account recovery, enterprise administration, user support, and problem troubleshooting and its related features. Conduct soft deletion when a user empties his or her trash, and provide a user support tool that enables authorized administrators to undelete any items accidentally deleted by users. Google implements this

strategy for our most popular productivity applications; otherwise, the user support engineering burden would be untenable.
You can extend the soft deletion strategy even further by offering users the option to recover deleted data. For example, the Gmail trash bin allows users to access messages that were deleted fewer than 30 days ago.
Another common source of unwanted data deletion occurs as a result of account hijacking. In account hijacking scenarios, a hijacker commonly deletes the original user's data before using the account for spamming and other unlawful purposes. When you combine the commonality of accidental user deletion with the risk of data deletion by hijackers, the case for a programmatic soft deletion and undeletion interface within and/or beneath your application becomes clear.
Soft deletion implies that once data is marked as such, it is destroyed after a reasonable delay. The length of the delay depends upon an organization's policies and applicable laws, available storage resources and cost, and product pricing and market positioning, especially in cases involving much short-lived data. Common choices of soft deletion delays are 15, 30, 45, or 60 days. In Google's experience, the majority of account hijacking and data integrity issues are reported or detected within 60 days. Therefore, the case for soft deleting data for longer than 60 days may not be strong.
Google has also found that the most devastating acute data deletion cases are caused by application developers unfamiliar with existing code but working on deletion-related code, especially batch processing pipelines (e.g., an offline MapReduce or Hadoop pipeline). It's advantageous to design your interfaces to hinder developers unfamiliar with your code from circumventing soft deletion features with new code. One effective way of achieving this is to implement cloud computing offerings that include built-in soft deletion and undeletion
APIs, making sure to enable said feature.128 Even the best armor is useless if you don't put it on.
Soft deletion strategies cover data deletion features in consumer products like Gmail or Google Drive, but what if you support a cloud computing offering instead? Assuming your cloud computing offering already supports a programmatic soft deletion and undeletion feature with reasonable defaults, the remaining accidental data deletion scenarios will originate in mistakes made by your own internal developers or your developer customers.

In such cases, it can be useful to introduce an additional layer of soft deletion, which we will refer to as "lazy deletion." You can think of lazy deletion as behind the scenes purging, controlled by the storage system (whereas soft deletion is controlled by and expressed to the client application or service). In a lazy deletion scenario, data that is deleted by a cloud application becomes immediately inaccessible to the application, but is preserved by the cloud service provider for up to a few weeks before destruction. Lazy deletion isn't advisable in all defense in depth strategies: a long lazy deletion period is costly in systems with much short-lived data, and impractical in systems that must guarantee destruction of deleted data within a reasonable time frame (i.e., those that offer privacy guarantees).
To sum up the first layer of defense in depth:

A trash folder that allows users to undelete data is the primary defense against user error.
Soft deletion is the primary defense against developer error and the secondary defense against user error.
In developer offerings, lazy deletion is the primary defense against internal developer error and the secondary defense against external developer error.
What about revision history? Some products provide the ability to revert items to previous states. When such a feature is available to users, it is a form of trash. When available to developers, it may or may not substitute for soft deletion, depending on its implementation.
At Google, revision history has proven useful in recovering from certain data corruption scenarios, but not in recovering from most data loss scenarios involving accidental deletion, programmatic or otherwise. This is because some revision history implementations treat deletion as a special case in which previous states must be removed, as opposed to mutating an item whose history may be retained for a certain time period. To provide adequate protection against unwanted deletion, apply the lazy and/or soft deletion principles to revision history also.

Second Layer: Backups and Their Related Recovery Methods

Backups and data recovery are the second line of defense after soft deletion. The most important principle in this layer is that backups don't matter; what matters

is recovery. The factors supporting successful recovery should drive your backup decisions, not the other way around.
In other words, the scenarios in which you want your backups to help you recover should dictate the following:
Which backup and recovery methods to use
How frequently you establish restore points by taking full or incremental backups of your data
Where you store backups How long you retain backups
How much recent data can you afford to lose during a recovery effort? The less data you can afford to lose, the more serious you should be about an incremental backup strategy. In one of Google's most extreme cases, we used a near-real- time streaming backup strategy for an older version of Gmail.
Even if money isn't a limitation, frequent full backups are expensive in other ways. Most notably, they impose a compute burden on the live datastores of your service while it's serving users, driving your service closer to its scalability and performance limits. To ease this burden, you can take full backups during off-peak hours, and then a series of incremental backups when your service is busier.
How quickly do you need to recover? The faster your users need to be rescued, the more local your backups should be. Often Google retains costly but quick-to- restore snapshots129 for very short periods of time within the storage instance, and stores less recent backups on random access distributed storage within the
same (or nearby) datacenter for a slightly longer time. Such a strategy alone would not protect from site-level failures, so those backups are often transferred to nearline or offline locations for a longer time period before they're expired in favor of newer backups.
How far back should your backups reach? Your backup strategy becomes more costly the further back you reach, while the scenarios from which you can hope to recover increase (although this increase is subject to diminishing returns).
In Google's experience, low-grade data mutation or deletion bugs within application code demand the furthest reaches back in time, as some of those bugs

were noticed months after the first data loss began. Such cases suggest that you'd like the ability to reach back in time as far as possible.
On the flip side, in a high-velocity development environment, changes to code and schema may render older backups expensive or impossible to use. Furthermore, it is challenging to recover different subsets of data to different restore points, because doing so would involve multiple backups. Yet, that is exactly the sort of recovery effort demanded by low-grade data corruption or deletion scenarios.
The strategies described in Third Layer: Early Detection are meant to speed detection of low-grade data mutation or deletion bugs within application code, at least partly warding off the need for this type of complex recovery effort. Still, how do you confer reasonable protection before you know what kinds of issues to detect? Google chose to draw the line between 30 and 90 days of backups for many services. Where a service falls within this window depends on its tolerance for data loss and its relative investments in early detection.
To sum up our advice for guarding against the 24 combinations of data integrity failure modes: addressing a broad range of scenarios at reasonable cost demands a tiered backup strategy. The first tier comprises many frequent and quickly restored backups stored closest to the live datastores, perhaps using the same or similar storage technologies as the data sources. Doing so confers protection from the majority of scenarios involving software bugs and developer error. Due to relative expense, backups are retained in this tier for anywhere from hours to single-digit days, and may take minutes to restore.
The second tier comprises fewer backups retained for single-digit or low double- digit days on random access distributed filesystems local to the site. These backups may take hours to restore and confer additional protection from mishaps affecting particular storage technologies in your serving stack, but not the technologies used to contain the backups. This tier also protects against bugs in your application that are detected too late to rely upon the first tier of your backup strategy. If you are introducing new versions of your code to production twice a week, it may make sense to retain these backups for at least a week or two before deleting them.
Subsequent tiers take advantage of nearline storage such as dedicated tape libraries and offsite storage of the backup media (e.g., tapes or disk drives).

Backups in these tiers confer protection against site-level issues, such as a datacenter power outage or distributed filesystem corruption due to a bug.
It is expensive to move large amounts of data to and from tiers. On the other hand, storage capacity at the later tiers does not contend with growth of the live production storage instances of your service. As a result, backups in these tiers tend to be taken less frequently but retained longer.

Overarching Layer: Replication

In an ideal world, every storage instance, including the instances containing your backups, would be replicated. During a data recovery effort, the last thing you want is to discover is that your backups themselves lost the needed data or that the datacenter containing the most useful backup is under maintenance.
As the volume of data increases, replication of every storage instance isn't always feasible. In such cases, it makes sense to stagger successive backups across different sites, each of which may fail independently, and to write your backups using a redundancy method such as RAID, Reed-Solomon erasure
codes, or GFS-style replication.130
When choosing a system of redundancy, don't rely upon an infrequently used scheme whose only "tests" of efficacy are your own infrequent data recovery attempts. Instead, choose a popular scheme that's in common and continual use by many of its users.

1T Versus 1E: Not "Just" a Bigger Backup

Processes and practices applied to volumes of data measured in T (terabytes) don't scale well to data measured in E (exabytes). Validating, copying, and performing round-trip tests on a few gigabytes of structured data is an interesting problem. However, assuming that you have sufficient knowledge of your schema and transaction model, this exercise doesn't present any special challenges. You typically just need to procure the machine resources to iterate over your data, perform some validation logic, and delegate enough storage to hold a few copies of your data.
Now let's up the ante: instead of a few gigabytes, let's try securing and validating  700  petabytes  of  structured  data.  Assuming  ideal  SATA  2.0

performance of 300 MB/s, a single task that iterates over all of your data and performs even the most basic of validation checks will take 8 decades. Making a few full backups, assuming you have the media, is going to take at least as long. Restore time, with some post-processing, will take even longer. We're now looking at almost a full century to restore a backup that was up to 80 years old when you started the restore. Obviously, such a strategy needs to be rethought.
The most common and largely effective technique used to back up massive amounts of data is to establish "trust points" in your data-portions of your stored data that are verified after being rendered immutable, usually by the passage of time. Once we know that a given user profile or transaction is fixed and won't be subject to further change, we can verify its internal state and make suitable copies for recovery purposes. You can then make incremental backups that only include data that has been modified or added since your last backup. This technique brings your backup time in line with your "mainline" processing time, meaning that frequent incremental backups can save you from the 80-year monolithic verify and copy job.
However, remember that we care about restores, not backups. Let's say that we took a full backup three years ago and have been making daily incremental backups since. A full restore of our data will serially process a chain of over 1,000 highly interdependent backups. Each independent backup incurs additional risk of failure, not to mention the logistical burden of scheduling and the runtime cost of those jobs.
Another way we can reduce the wall time of our copying and verification jobs is to distribute the load. If we shard our data well, it's possible to run N tasks in parallel, with each task responsible for copying and verifying 1/Nth of our data. Doing so requires some forethought and planning in the schema design and the physical deployment of our data in order to:
Balance the data correctly
Ensure the independence of each shard
Avoid contention among the concurrent sibling tasks

Between distributing the load horizontally and restricting the work to vertical slices of the data demarcated by time, we can reduce those eight decades of wall time by several orders of magnitude, rendering our restores relevant.

Third Layer: Early Detection

"Bad" data doesn't sit idly by, it propagates. References to missing or corrupt data are copied, links fan out, and with every update the overall quality of your datastore goes down. Subsequent dependent transactions and potential data format changes make restoring from a given backup more difficult as the clock ticks. The sooner you know about a data loss, the easier and more complete your recovery can be.

Challenges faced by cloud developers

In high-velocity environments, cloud application and infrastructure services face many data integrity challenges at runtime, such as:
Referential integrity between datastores Schema changes
Aging code
Zero-downtime data migrations
Evolving integration points with other services

Without conscious engineering effort to track emerging relationships in its data, the data quality of a successful and growing service degrades over time.
Often, the novice cloud developer who chooses a distributed consistent storage API (such as Megastore) delegates the integrity of the application's data to the distributed consistent algorithm implemented beneath the API (such as Paxos; see Managing Critical State: Distributed Consensus for Reliability). The developer reasons that the selected API alone will keep the application's data in good shape. As a result, they unify all application data into a single storage solution that guarantees distributed consistency, avoiding referential integrity problems in exchange for reduced performance and/or scale.
While such algorithms are infallible in theory, their implementations are often riddled with hacks, optimizations, bugs, and educated guesses. For example: in theory, Paxos ignores failed compute nodes and can make progress as long as a quorum of functioning nodes is maintained. In practice, however, ignoring a failed node may correspond to timeouts, retries, and other failure-handling approaches beneath the particular Paxos implementation [Cha07]. How long should Paxos try to contact an unresponsive node before timing it out? When a

particular machine fails (perhaps intermittently) in a certain way, with a certain timing, and at a particular datacenter, unpredictable behavior results. The larger the scale of an application, the more frequently the application is affected, unbeknownst, by such inconsistencies. If this logic holds true even when applied to Paxos implementations (as has been true for Google), then it must be more true for eventually consistent implementations such as Bigtable (which has also shown to be true). Affected applications have no way to know that 100% of their data is good until they check: trust storage systems, but verify!
To complicate this problem, in order to recover from low-grade data corruption or deletion scenarios, we must recover different subsets of data to different restore points using different backups, while changes to code and schema may render older backups ineffective in high-velocity environments.

Out-of-band data validation

To prevent data quality from degrading before users' eyes, and to detect low- grade data corruption or data loss scenarios before they become unrecoverable, a system of out-of-band checks and balances is needed both within and between an application's datastores.
Most often, these data validation pipelines are implemented as collections of map-reductions or Hadoop jobs. Frequently, such pipelines are added as an afterthought to services that are already popular and successful. Sometimes, such pipelines are first attempted when services reach scalability limits and are rebuilt from the ground up. Google has built validators in response to each of these situations.
Shunting some developers to work on a data validation pipeline can slow engineering velocity in the short term. However, devoting engineering resources to data validation endows other developers with the courage to move faster in the long run, because the engineers know that data corruption bugs are less likely to sneak into production unnoticed. Similar to the effects enjoyed when units test are introduced early in the project lifecycle, a data validation pipeline results in an overall acceleration of software development projects.
To cite a specific example: Gmail sports a number of data validators, each of which has detected actual data integrity problems in production. Gmail developers  derive  comfort  from  the  knowledge  that  bugs  introducing

inconsistencies in production data are detected within 24 hours, and shudder at the thought of running their data validators less often than daily. These validators, along with a culture of unit and regression testing and other best practices, have given Gmail developers the courage to introduce code changes to Gmail's production storage implementation more frequently than once a week.
Out-of-band data validation is tricky to implement correctly. When too strict, even simple, appropriate changes cause validation to fail. As a result, engineers abandon data validation altogether. If the data validation isn't strict enough, user experience-affecting data corruption can slip through undetected. To find the right balance, only validate invariants that cause devastation to users.
For example, Google Drive periodically validates that file contents align with listings in Drive folders. If these two elements don't align, some files would be missing data-a disastrous outcome. Drive infrastructure developers were so invested in data integrity that they also enhanced their validators to automatically fix such inconsistencies. This safeguard turned a potential emergency "all-hands-on-deck-omigosh-files-are-disappearing!" data loss situation in 2013 into a business as usual, "let's go home and fix the root cause on Monday," situation. By transforming emergencies into business as usual, validators improve engineering morale, quality of life, and predictability.
Out-of-band validators can be expensive at scale. A significant portion of Gmail's compute resource footprint supports a collection of daily validators. To compound this expense, these validators also lower server-side cache hit rates, reducing server-side responsiveness experienced by users. To mitigate this hit to responsiveness, Gmail provides a variety of knobs for rate-limiting its validators and periodically refactors the validators to reduce disk contention. In one such refactoring effort, we cut the contention for disk spindles by 60% without significantly reducing the scope of the invariants they covered. While the majority of Gmail's validators run daily, the workload of the largest validator is divided into 10-14 shards, with one shard validated per day for reasons of scale.
Google Compute Storage is another example of the challenges scale entails to data validation. When its out-of-band validators could no longer finish within a day, Compute Storage engineers had to devise a more efficient way to verify its metadata than use of brute force alone. Similar to its application in data recovery, a tiered strategy can also be useful in out-of-band data validation. As a service scales, sacrifice rigor in daily validators. Make sure that daily validators

continue to catch the most disastrous scenarios within 24 hours, but continue with more rigorous validation at reduced frequency to contain costs and latency.
Troubleshooting failed validations can take significant effort. Causes of an intermittent failed validation could vanish within minutes, hours, or days. Therefore, the ability to rapidly drill down into validation audit logs is essential. Mature Google services provide on-call engineers with comprehensive documentation and tools to troubleshoot. For example, on-call engineers for Gmail are provided with:
A suite of playbook entries describing how to respond to a validation failure alert
A BigQuery-like investigation tool A data validation dashboard
Effective out-of-band data validation demands all of the following: Validation job management
Monitoring, alerts, and dashboards
Rate-limiting features Troubleshooting tools Production playbooks
Data validation APIs that make validators easy to add and refactor

The majority of small engineering teams operating at high velocity can't afford to design, build, and maintain all of these systems. If they are pressured to do so, the result is often fragile, limited, and wasteful one-offs that fall quickly into disrepair. Therefore, structure your engineering teams such that a central infrastructure team provides a data validation framework for multiple product engineering teams. The central infrastructure team maintains the out-of-band data validation framework, while the product engineering teams maintain the custom business logic at the heart of the validator to keep pace with their evolving products.

Knowing That Data Recovery Will Work

When does a light bulb break? When flicking the switch fails to turn on the light? Not always-often the bulb had already failed, and you simply notice the failure at the unresponsive flick of the switch. By then, the room is dark and

you've stubbed your toe.

Likewise, your recovery dependencies (meaning mostly, but not only, your backup), may be in a latent broken state, which you aren't aware of until you attempt to recover data.
If you discover that your restore process is broken before you need to rely upon it, you can address the vulnerability before you fall victim to it: you can take another backup, provision additional resources, and change your SLO. But to take these actions proactively, you first have to know they're needed. To detect these vulnerabilities:
Continuously test the recovery process as part of your normal operations Set up alerts that fire when a recovery process fails to provide a heartbeat indication of its success
What can go wrong with your recovery process? Anything and everything- which is why the only test that should let you sleep at night is a full end-to-end test. Let the proof be in the pudding. Even if you recently ran a successful recovery, parts of your recovery process can still break. If you take away just one lesson from this chapter, remember that you only know that you can recover your recent state if you actually do so.
If recovery tests are a manual, staged event, testing becomes an unwelcome bit of drudgery that isn't performed either deeply or frequently enough to deserve your confidence. Therefore, automate these tests whenever possible and then run them continuously.
The aspects of your recovery plan you should confirm are myriad: Are your backups valid and complete, or are they empty?
Do you have sufficient machine resources to run all of the setup, restore,
and post-processing tasks that comprise your recovery? Does the recovery process complete in reasonable wall time?
Are you able to monitor the state of your recovery process as it progresses? Are you free of critical dependencies on resources outside of your control, such as access to an offsite media storage vault that isn't available 24/7?
Our testing has discovered the aforementioned failures, as well as failures of many other components of a successful data recovery. If we hadn't discovered

these failures in regular tests-that is, if we came across the failures only when we needed to recover user data in real emergencies-it's quite possible that some of Google's most successful products today may not have stood the test of time.
Failures are inevitable. If you wait to discover them when you're under the gun, facing a real data loss, you're playing with fire. If testing forces the failures to happen before actual catastrophe strikes, you can fix problems before any harm comes to fruition.

Case Studies
Life imitates art (or in this case, science), and as we predicted, real life has given us unfortunate and inevitable opportunities to put our data recovery systems and processes to the test, under real-world pressure. Two of the more notable and interesting of these opportunities are discussed here.

Gmail-February, 2011: Restore from GTape

The first recovery case study we'll examine was unique in a couple of ways: the number of failures that coincided to bring about the data loss, and the fact that it was the largest use of our last line of defense, the GTape offline backup system.

Sunday, February 27, 2011, late in the evening

The Gmail backup system pager is triggered, displaying a phone number to join a conference call. The event we had long feared-indeed, the reason for the backup system's existence-has come to pass: Gmail lost a significant amount of user data. Despite the system's many safeguards and internal checks and redundancies, the data disappeared from Gmail.
This was the first large-scale use of GTape, a global backup system for Gmail, to restore live customer data. Fortunately, it was not the first such restore, as similar situations had been previously simulated many times. Therefore, we were able to:
Deliver an estimate of how long it would take to restore the majority of the affected user accounts

Restore all of the accounts within several hours of our initial estimate Recover 99%+ of the data before the estimated completion time
Was the ability to formulate such an estimate luck? No-our success was the fruit of planning, adherence to best practices, hard work, and cooperation, and we were glad to see our investment in each of these elements pay off as well as it did. Google was able to restore the lost data in a timely manner by executing a plan designed according to the best practices of Defense in Depth and Emergency Preparedness.
When Google publicly revealed that we recovered this data from our previously undisclosed tape backup system [Slo11], public reaction was a mix of surprise and amusement. Tape? Doesn't Google have lots of disks and a fast network to replicate data this important? Of course Google has such resources, but the principle of Defense in Depth dictates providing multiple layers of protection to guard against the breakdown or compromise of any single protection mechanism. Backing up online systems such as Gmail provides defense in depth at two layers:
A failure of the internal Gmail redundancy and backup subsystems
A wide failure or zero-day vulnerability in a device driver or filesystem affecting the underlying storage medium (disk)
This particular failure resulted from the first scenario-while Gmail had internal means of recovering lost data, this loss went beyond what internal means could recover.
One of the most internally celebrated aspects of the Gmail data recovery was the degree of cooperation and smooth coordination that comprised the recovery. Many teams, some completely unrelated to Gmail or data recovery, pitched in to help. The recovery couldn't have succeeded so smoothly without a central plan to choreograph such a widely distributed Herculean effort; this plan was the product of regular dress rehearsals and dry runs. Google's devotion to emergency preparedness leads us to view such failures as inevitable. Accepting this inevitability, we don't hope or bet to avoid such disasters, but anticipate that they will occur. Thus, we need a plan for dealing not only with the foreseeable failures, but for some amount of random undifferentiated breakage, as well.
In short, we always knew that adherence to best practices is important, and it was

good to see that maxim proven true.

Google Music-March 2012: Runaway Deletion Detection

The second failure we'll examine entails challenges in logistics that are unique to the scale of the datastore being recovered: where do you store over 5,000 tapes, and how do you efficiently (or even feasibly) read that much data from offline media in a reasonable amount of time?

Tuesday, March 6th, 2012, mid-afternoon Discovering the problem
A Google Music user reports that previously unproblematic tracks are being skipped. The team responsible for interfacing with Google Music's users notifies Google Music engineers. The problem is investigated as a possible media streaming issue.
On March 7th, the investigating engineer discovers that the unplayable track's metadata is missing a reference that should point to the actual audio data. He is surprised. The obvious fix is to locate the audio data and reinstate the reference to the data. However, Google engineering prides itself for a culture of fixing issues at the root, so the engineer digs deeper.
When he finds the cause of the data integrity lapse, he almost has a heart attack: the audio reference was removed by a privacy-protecting data deletion pipeline. This part of Google Music was designed to delete very large numbers of audio tracks in record time.

Assessing the damage

Google's privacy policy protects a user's personal data. As applied to Google Music specifically, our privacy policy means that music files and relevant metadata are removed within reasonable time after users delete them. As the popularity of Google Music soared, the amount of data grew rapidly, so the original deletion implementation needed to be redesigned in 2012 to be more efficient. On February 6th, the updated data deletion pipeline enjoyed its maiden run, to remove relevant metadata. Nothing seemed amiss at the time, so a second

stage of the pipeline was allowed to remove the associated audio data too.

Could the engineer's worst nightmare be true? He immediately sounded the alarm, raising the priority of the support case to Google's most urgent classification and reporting the issue to engineering management and Site Reliability Engineering. A small team of Google Music developers and SREs assembled to tackle the issue, and the offending pipeline was temporarily disabled to stem the tide of external user casualties.
Next, manually checking the metadata for millions to billions of files organized across multiple datacenters would be unthinkable. So the team whipped up a hasty MapReduce job to assess the damage and waited desperately for the job to complete. They froze as its results came in on March 8th: the refactored data deletion pipeline had removed approximately 600,000 audio references that shouldn't have been removed, affecting audio files for 21,000 users. Since the hasty diagnosis pipeline made a few simplifications, the true extent of the damage could be worse.
It had been over a month since the buggy data deletion pipeline first ran, and that maiden run itself removed hundreds of thousands of audio tracks that should not have been removed. Was there any hope of getting the data back? If the tracks weren't recovered, or weren't recovered fast enough, Google would have to face the music from its users. How could we not have noticed this glitch?

Resolving the issue

Parallel bug identification and recovery efforts

The first step in resolving the issue was to identify the actual bug, and determine how and why the bug happened. As long as the root cause wasn't identified and fixed, any recovery efforts would be in vain. We would be under pressure to re- enable the pipeline to respect the requests of users who deleted audio tracks, but doing so would hurt innocent users who would continue to lose store-bought music, or worse, their own painstakingly recorded audio files. The only way to
escape the Catch-22131 was to fix the issue at its root, and fix it quickly.
Yet there was no time to waste before mounting the recovery effort. The audio tracks themselves were backed up to tape, but unlike our Gmail case study, the encrypted backup tapes for Google Music were trucked to offsite storage

locations, because that option offered more space for voluminous backups of users' audio data. To restore the experience of affected users quickly, the team decided to troubleshoot the root cause while retrieving the offsite backup tapes (a rather time-intensive restore option) in parallel.
The engineers split into two groups. The most experienced SREs worked on the recovery effort, while the developers analyzed the data deletion code and attempted to fix the data loss bug at its root. Due to incomplete knowledge of the root problem, the recovery would have to be staged in multiple passes. The first batch of nearly half a million audio tracks was identified, and the team that maintained the tape backup system was notified of the emergency recovery effort at 4:34 p.m. Pacific Time on March 8th.
The recovery team had one factor working in their favor: this recovery effort occurred just weeks after the company's annual disaster recovery testing exercise (see [Kri12]). The tape backup team already knew the capabilities and limitations of their subsystems that had been the subjects of DiRT tests and began dusting off a new tool they'd tested during a DiRT exercise. Using the new tool, the combined recovery team began the painstaking effort of mapping hundreds of thousands of audio files to backups registered in the tape backup system, and then mapping the files from backups to actual tapes.
In this way, the team determined that the initial recovery effort would involve the recall of over 5,000 backup tapes by truck. Afterwards, datacenter technicians would have to clear out space for the tapes at tape libraries. A long, complex process of registering the tapes and extracting the data from the tapes would follow, involving workarounds and mitigations in the event of bad tapes, bad drives, and unexpected system interactions.
Unfortunately, only 436,223 of the approximately 600,000 lost audio tracks were found on tape backups, which meant that about 161,000 other audio tracks were eaten before they could be backed up. The recovery team decided to figure out how to recover the 161,000 missing tracks after they initiated the recovery process for the tracks with tape backups.
Meanwhile, the root cause team had pursued and abandoned a red herring: they initially thought that a storage service on which Google Music depended had provided buggy data that misled the data deletion pipelines to remove the wrong audio data. Upon closer investigation, that theory was proven false. The root

cause team scratched their heads and continued their search for the elusive bug.

First wave of recovery

Once the recovery team had identified the backup tapes, the first recovery wave kicked off on March 8th. Requesting 1.5 petabytes of data distributed among thousands of tapes from offsite storage was one matter, but extracting the data from the tapes was quite another. The custom-built tape backup software stack wasn't designed to handle a single restore operation of such a large size, so the initial recovery was split into 5,475 restore jobs. It would take a human operator typing in one restore command a minute more than three days to request that many restores, and any human operator would no doubt make many mistakes. Just requesting the restore from the tape backup system needed SRE to develop a
programmatic solution.132
By midnight on March 9th, Music SRE finished requesting all 5,475 restores. The tape backup system began working its magic. Four hours later, it spat out a list of 5,337 backup tapes to be recalled from offsite locations. In another eight hours, the tapes arrived at a datacenter in a series of truck deliveries.
While the trucks were en route, datacenter technicians took several tape libraries down for maintenance and removed thousands of tapes to make way for the massive data recovery operation. Then the technicians began painstakingly loading the tapes by hand as thousands of tapes arrived in the wee hours of the morning. In past DiRT exercises, this manual process proved hundreds of times faster for massive restores than the robot-based methods provided by the tape library vendors. Within three hours, the libraries were back up scanning the tapes and performing thousands of restore jobs onto distributed compute storage.
Despite the team's DiRT experience, the massive 1.5 petabyte recovery took longer than the two days estimated. By the morning of March 10th, only 74% of the 436,223 audio files had been successfully transferred from 3,475 recalled backup tapes to distributed filesystem storage at a nearby compute cluster. The other 1,862 backup tapes had been omitted from the tape recall process by a vendor. In addition, the recovery process had been held up by 17 bad tapes. In anticipation of a failure due to bad tapes, a redundant encoding had been used to write the backup files. Additional truck deliveries were set off to recall the redundancy tapes, along with the other 1,862 tapes that had been omitted by the first offsite recall.

By the morning of March 11th, over 99.95% of the restore operation had completed, and the recall of additional redundancy tapes for the remaining files was in progress. Although the data was safely on distributed filesystems, additional data recovery steps were necessary in order to make them accessible to users. The Google Music Team began exercising these final steps of the data recovery process in parallel on a small sample of recovered audio files to make sure the process still worked as expected.
At that moment, Google Music production pagers sounded due to an unrelated but critical user-affecting production failure-a failure that fully engaged the Google Music team for two days. The data recovery effort resumed on March 13th, when all 436,223 audio tracks were once again made accessible to their users. In just short of 7 days, 1.5 petabytes of audio data had been reinstated to users with the help of offsite tape backups; 5 of the 7 days comprised the actual data recovery effort.

Second wave of recovery

With the first wave of the recovery process behind them, the team shifted its focus to the other 161,000 missing audio files that had been deleted by the bug before they were backed up. The majority of these files were store-bought and promotional tracks, and the original store copies were unaffected by the bug. Such tracks were quickly reinstated so that the affected users could enjoy their music again.
However, a small portion of the 161,000 audio files had been uploaded by the users themselves. The Google Music Team prompted their servers to request that the Google Music clients of affected users re-upload files dating from March 14th onward. This process lasted more than a week. Thus concluded the complete recovery effort for the incident.

Addressing the root cause

Eventually, the Google Music Team identified the flaw in their refactored data deletion pipeline. To understand this flaw, you first need context about how offline data processing systems evolve on a large scale.
For a large and complex service comprising several subsystems and storage services, even a task as simple as removing deleted data needs to be performed

in stages, each involving different datastores.

For data processing to finish quickly, the processing is parallelized to run across tens of thousands of machines that exert a large load on various subsystems. This distribution can slow the service for users, or cause the service to crash under the heavy load.
To avoid these undesirable scenarios, cloud computing engineers often make a short-lived copy of data on secondary storage, where the data processing is then performed. Unless the relative age of the secondary copies of data is carefully coordinated, this practice introduces race conditions.
For instance, two stages of a pipeline may be designed to run in strict succession, three hours apart, so that the second stage can make a simplifying assumption about the correctness of its inputs. Without this simplifying assumption, the logic of the second stage may be hard to parallelize. But the stages may take longer to complete as the volume of data grows. Eventually, the original design assumptions may no longer hold for certain pieces of data needed by the second stage.
At first, this race condition may occur for a tiny fraction of data. But as the volume of data increases, a larger and larger fraction of the data is at risk for triggering a race condition. Such a scenario is probabilistic-the pipeline works correctly for the vast majority of data and for most of the time. When such race conditions occur in a data deletion pipeline, the wrong data can be deleted nondeterministically.
Google Music's data deletion pipeline was designed with coordination and large margins for error in place. But when upstream stages of the pipeline began to require increased time as the service grew, performance optimizations were put in place so Google Music could continue to meet privacy requirements. As a result, the probability of an inadvertent data-deleting race condition in this pipeline began to increase. When the pipeline was refactored, this probability again significantly increased, up to a point at which the race conditions occurred more regularly.
In the wake of the recovery effort, Google Music redesigned its data deletion pipeline to eliminate this type of race condition. In addition, we enhanced production monitoring and alerting systems to detect similar large-scale runaway

deletion bugs with the aim of detecting and fixing such issues before users notice any problems.133
General Principles of SRE as Applied to Data Integrity
General principles of SRE can be applied to the specifics of data integrity and cloud computing as described in this section.

Beginner's Mind

Large-scale, complex services have inherent bugs that can't be fully grokked. Never think you understand enough of a complex system to say it won't fail in a certain way. Trust but verify, and apply defense in depth. (Note: "Beginner's mind" does not suggest putting a new hire in charge of that data deletion pipeline!)

Trust but Verify

Any API upon which you depend won't work perfectly all of the time. It's a given that regardless of your engineering quality or rigor of testing, the API will have defects. Check the correctness of the most critical elements of your data using out-of-band data validators, even if API semantics suggest that you need not do so. Perfect algorithms may not have perfect implementations.

Hope Is Not a Strategy

System components that aren't continually exercised fail when you need them most. Prove that data recovery works with regular exercise, or data recovery won't work. Humans lack discipline to continually exercise system components, so automation is your friend. However, when you staff such automation efforts with engineers who have competing priorities, you may end up with temporary stopgaps.

Defense in Depth

Even the most bulletproof system is susceptible to bugs and operator error. In

order for data integrity issues to be fixable, services must detect such issues quickly. Every strategy eventually fails in changing environments. The best data integrity strategies are multitiered-multiple strategies that fall back to one another and address a broad swath of scenarios together at reasonable cost.

Revisit and Reexamine


The fact that your data "was safe yesterday" isn't going to help you tomorrow, or even today. Systems and infrastructure change, and you've got to prove that your assumptions and processes remain relevant in the face of progress. Consider the following.
The Shakespeare service has received quite a bit of positive press, and its user base is steadily increasing. No real attention was paid to data integrity as the service was being built. Of course, we don't want to serve bad bits, but if the index Bigtable is lost, we can easily re-create it from the original Shakespeare texts and a MapReduce. Doing so would take very little time, so we never made backups of the index.
Now a new feature allows users to make text annotations. Suddenly, our dataset can no longer be easily re-created, while the user data is increasingly valuable to our users. Therefore, we need to revisit our replication options-we're not just replicating for latency and bandwidth, but for data integrity, as well. Therefore, we need to create and test a backup and restore procedure. This procedure is also periodically tested by a DiRT exercise to ensure that we can restore users' annotations from backups within the time set by the SLO.

Conclusion
Data availability must be a foremost concern of any data-centric system. Rather than focusing on the means to the end, Google SRE finds it useful to borrow a page from test-driven development by proving that our systems can maintain data availability with a predicted maximum down time. The means and mechanisms that we use to achieve this end goal are necessary evils. By keeping our eyes on the goal, we avoid falling into the trap in which "The operation was a success, but the system died."
Recognizing that not just anything can go wrong, but that everything will go wrong is a significant step toward preparation for any real emergency. A matrix

of all possible combinations of disasters with plans to address each of these disasters permits you to sleep soundly for at least one night; keeping your recovery plans current and exercised permits you to sleep the other 364 nights of the year.
As you get better at recovering from any breakage in reasonable time N, find ways to whittle down that time through more rapid and finer-grained loss detection, with the goal of approaching N = 0. You can then switch from planning recovery to planning prevention, with the aim of achieving the holy grail of all the data, all the time. Achieve this goal, and you can sleep on the beach on that well-deserved vacation.

122Atomicity,	Consistency,	Isolation,	Durability;	see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ACID. SQL databases such as MySQL and PostgreSQL strive to achieve these properties.

123Basically Available, Soft state, Eventual consistency; see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eventual_consistency. BASE systems, like Bigtable and Megastore, are often also described as "NoSQL."

124For further reading on ACID and BASE APIs, see [Gol14] and [Bai13]. 125Binary Large Object; see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_large_object. 126See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-day_(computing).
127Clay tablets are the oldest known examples of writing. For a broader discussion of preserving data for the long haul, see [Con96].

128Upon reading this advice, one might ask: since you have to offer an API on top of the datastore to implement soft deletion, why stop at soft deletion, when you could offer many other features that protect against accidental data deletion by users? To take a specific example from Google's experience, consider Blobstore: rather than allow customers to delete Blob data and metadata directly, the Blob APIs implement many safety features, including default backup policies (offline replicas), end-to-end checksums, and default tombstone lifetimes (soft deletion). It turns out that on multiple occasions, soft deletion saved Blobstore's clients from data loss that could have been much, much worse. There are certainly many deletion protection features worth calling out, but for

companies with required data deletion deadlines, soft deletion was the most pertinent protection against bugs and accidental deletion in the case of Blobstore's clients.

129"Snapshot" here refers to a read-only, static view of a storage instance, such as snapshots of SQL databases. Snapshots are often implemented using copy-on- write semantics for storage efficiency. They can be expensive for two reasons: first, they contend for the same storage capacity as the live datastores, and second, the faster your data mutates, the less efficiency is gained from copying- on-write.

130For more information on GFS-style replication, see [Ghe03]. For more information	on	Reed-Solomon	erasure	codes,	see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reed-Solomon_error_correction.

131See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catch-22_(logic).
132In practice, coming up with a programmatic solution was not a hurdle because the majority of SREs are experienced software engineers, as was the case here. The expectation of such experience makes SREs notoriously hard to find and hire, and from this case study and other data points, you can begin to appreciate why SRE hires practicing software engineers; see [Jon15].

133In our experience, cloud computing engineers are often reluctant to set up production alerts on data deletion rates due to natural variation of per-user data deletion rates with time. However, since the intent of such an alert is to detect global rather than local deletion rate anomalies, it would be more useful to alert when the global data deletion rate, aggregated across all users, crosses an extreme threshold (such as 10x the observed 95th percentile), as opposed to less useful per-user deletion rate alerts.

Chapter 27 - Reliable Product Launches at Scale
Written by Rhandeev Singh and Sebastian Kirsch with Vivek RauEdited by Betsy Beyer

Internet companies like Google are able to launch new products and features in far more rapid iterations than traditional companies. Site Reliability's role in this process is to enable a rapid pace of change without compromising stability of the site. We created a dedicated team of "Launch Coordination Engineers" to consult with engineering teams on the technical aspects of a successful launch.
The team also curated a "launch checklist" of common questions to ask about a launch, and recipes to solve common issues. The checklist proved to be a useful tool for ensuring reproducibly reliable launches.
Consider an ordinary Google service-for example, Keyhole, which serves satellite imagery for Google Maps and Google Earth. On a normal day, Keyhole serves up to several thousand satellite images per second. But on Christmas Eve in 2011, it received 25 times its normal peak traffic-upward of one million requests per second. What caused this massive surge in traffic?

Santa was coming.

A few years ago, Google collaborated with NORAD (the North American Aerospace Defense Command) to host a Christmas-themed website that tracked Santa's progress around the world, allowing users to watch him deliver presents in real time. Part of the experience was a "virtual fly-over," which used satellite imagery to track Santa's progress over a simulated world.
While a project like NORAD Tracks Santa may seem whimsical, it had all the characteristics that define a difficult and risky launch: a hard deadline (Google couldn't ask Santa to come a week later if the site wasn't ready), a lot of publicity, an audience of millions, and a very steep traffic ramp-up (everybody was going to be watching the site on Christmas Eve). Never underestimate the

power of millions of kids anxious for presents-this project had a very real possibility of bringing Google's servers to their knees.
Google's Site Reliability Engineering team worked hard to prepare our infrastructure for this launch, making sure that Santa could deliver all his presents on time under the watchful eyes of an expectant audience. The last thing we wanted was to make children cry because they couldn't watch Santa deliver presents. In fact, we dubbed the various kill switches built into the experience to protect our services "Make-children-cry switches." Anticipating the many different ways this launch could go wrong and coordinating between the different engineering groups involved in the launch fell to a special team within Site Reliability Engineering: the Launch Coordination Engineers (LCE).
Launching a new product or feature is the moment of truth for every company- the point at which months or years of effort are presented to the world. Traditional companies launch new products at a fairly low rate. The launch cycle at Internet companies is markedly different. Launches and rapid iterations are far easier because new features can be rolled out on the server side, rather than requiring software rollout on individual customer workstations.
Google defines a launch as any new code that introduces an externally visible change to an application. Depending on a launch's characteristics-the combination of attributes, the timing, the number of steps involved, and the complexity-the launch process can vary greatly. According to this definition, Google sometimes performs up to 70 launches per week.
This rapid rate of change provides both the rationale and the opportunity for creating a streamlined launch process. A company that only launches a product every three years doesn't need a detailed launch process. By the time a new launch occurs, most components of the previously developed launch process will be outdated. Nor do traditional companies have the opportunity to design a detailed launch process, because they don't accumulate enough experience performing launches to generate a robust and mature process.

Launch Coordination Engineering
Good software engineers have a great deal of expertise in coding and design, and understand the technology of their own products very well. However, the same engineers may be unfamiliar with the challenges and pitfalls of launching a

product to millions of users while simultaneously minimizing outages and maximizing performance.
Google approached the challenges inherent to launches by creating a dedicated consulting team within SRE tasked with the technical side of launching a new product or feature. Staffed by software engineers and systems engineers-some with experience in other SRE teams-this team specializes in guiding developers toward building reliable and fast products that meet Google's standards for robustness, scalability, and reliability. This consulting team, Launch Coordination Engineering (LCE), facilitates a smooth launch process in a few ways:
Auditing products and services for compliance with Google's reliability standards and best practices, and providing specific actions to improve reliability
Acting as a liaison between the multiple teams involved in a launch
Driving the technical aspects of a launch by making sure that tasks maintain momentum
Acting as gatekeepers and signing off on launches determined to be "safe" Educating developers on best practices and on how to integrate with Google's services, equipping them with internal documentation and training resources to speed up their learning
Members of the LCE team audit services at various times during the service lifecycle. Most audits are conducted before a new product or service launches. If a product development team performs a launch without SRE support, LCE provides the appropriate domain knowledge to ensure a smooth launch. But even products that already have strong SRE support often engage with the LCE team during critical launches. The challenges teams face when launching a new product are substantially different from the day-to-day operation of a reliable service (a task at which SRE teams already excel), and the LCE team can draw on the experience from hundreds of launches. The LCE team also facilitates service audits when new services first engage with SRE.

The Role of the Launch Coordination Engineer

Our Launch Coordination Engineering team is composed of Launch Coordination Engineers (LCEs), who are either hired directly into this role, or are SREs with hands-on experience running Google services. LCEs are held to

the same technical requirements as any other SRE, and are also expected to have strong communication and leadership skills-an LCE brings disparate parties together to work toward a common goal, mediates occasional conflicts, and guides, coaches, and educates fellow engineers.
A team dedicated to coordinating launches offers the following advantages: Breadth of experience
As a true cross-product team, the members are active across almost all of Google's product areas. Extensive cross-product knowledge and relationships with many teams across the company make LCEs excellent vehicles for knowledge transfer.
Cross-functional perspective

LCEs have a holistic view of the launch, which enables them to coordinate among disparate teams in SRE, development, and product management. This holistic approach is particularly important for complicated launches that can span more than half a dozen teams in multiple time zones.
Objectivity

As a nonpartisan advisor, an LCE plays a balancing and mediating role between stakeholders including SRE, product developers, product managers, and marketing.
Because Launch Coordination Engineer is an SRE role, LCEs are incentivized to prioritize reliability over other concerns. A company that does not share Google's reliability goals, but shares its rapid rate of change, may choose a different incentive structure.

Setting Up a Launch Process
Google has honed its launch process over a period of more than 10 years. Over time we have identified a number of criteria that characterize a good launch process:
Lightweight

    Easy on developers Robust
    Catches obvious errors Thorough
    Addresses important details consistently and reproducibly Scalable
Accommodates both a large number of simple launches and fewer complex launches
Adaptable

Works well for common types of launches (for example, adding a new UI language to a product) and new types of launches (for example, the initial launch of the Chrome browser or Google Fiber)
As you can see, some of these requirements are in obvious conflict. For example, it's hard to design a process that is simultaneously lightweight and thorough. Balancing these criteria against each other requires continuous work. Google has successfully employed a few tactics to help us achieve these criteria:
Simplicity

Get the basics right. Don't plan for every eventuality.

A high touch approach

Experienced engineers customize the process to suit each launch.

Fast common paths

Identify classes of launches that always follow a common pattern (such as launching a product in a new country), and provide a simplified launch process for this class.
Experience has demonstrated that engineers are likely to sidestep processes that

they consider too burdensome or as adding insufficient value-especially when a team is already in crunch mode, and the launch process is seen as just another item blocking their launch. For this reason, LCE must optimize the launch experience continuously to strike the right balance between cost and benefit.

The Launch Checklist

Checklists are used to reduce failure and ensure consistency and completeness across a variety of disciplines. Common examples include aviation preflight checklists and surgical checklists [Gaw09]. Similarly, LCE employs a launch checklist for launch qualification. The checklist (Launch Coordination Checklist) helps an LCE assess the launch and provides the launching team with action items and pointers to more information. Here are some examples of items a checklist might include:
Question: Do you need a new domain name?

Action item: Coordinate with marketing on your desired domain name, and request registration of the domain. Here is a link to the marketing form.
Question: Are you storing persistent data?

Action item: Make sure you implement backups. Here are instructions for implementing backups.
Question: Could a user potentially abuse your service?

Action item: Implement rate limiting and quotas. Use the following shared service.
In practice, there is a near-infinite number of questions to ask about any system, and it is easy for the checklist to grow to an unmanageable size. Maintaining a manageable burden on developers requires careful curation of the checklist. In an effort to curb its growth, at one point, adding new questions to Google's launch checklist required approval from a vice president. LCE now uses the following guidelines:
Every question's importance must be substantiated, ideally by a previous launch disaster.

Every instruction must be concrete, practical, and reasonable for developers to accomplish.
The checklist needs continuous attention in order to remain relevant and up-to- date: recommendations change over time, internal systems are replaced by different systems, and areas of concern from previous launches become obsolete due to new policies and processes. LCEs curate the checklist continuously and make small updates when team members notice items that need to be modified. Once or twice a year a team member reviews the entire checklist to identify obsolete items, and then works with service owners and subject matter experts to modernize sections of the checklist.

Driving Convergence and Simplification

In a large organization, engineers may not be aware of available infrastructure for common tasks (such as rate limiting). Lacking proper guidance, they're likely to re-implement existing solutions. Converging on a set of common infrastructure libraries avoids this scenario, and provides obvious benefits to the company: it cuts down on duplicate effort, makes knowledge more easily transferable between services, and results in a higher level of engineering and service quality due to the concentrated attention given to infrastructure.
Almost all groups at Google participate in a common launch process, which makes the launch checklist a vehicle for driving convergence on common infrastructure. Rather than implementing a custom solution, LCE can recommend existing infrastructure as building blocks-infrastructure that is already hardened through years of experience and that can help mitigate capacity, performance, or scalability risks. Examples include common infrastructure for rate limiting or user quotas, pushing new data to servers, or releasing new versions of a binary. This type of standardization helped to radically simplify the launch checklist: for example, long sections of the checklist dealing with requirements for rate limiting could be replaced with a single line that stated, "Implement rate limiting using system X."
Due to their breadth of experience across all of Google's products, LCEs are also in a unique position to identify opportunities for simplification. While working on a launch, they witness the stumbling blocks firsthand: which parts of a launch are causing the most struggle, which steps take a disproportionate amount of time, which problems get solved independently over and over again in similar

ways, where common infrastructure is lacking, or where duplication exists in common infrastructure. LCEs have various ways to streamline the launch experience and act as advocates for the launching teams. For example, LCEs might work with the owners of a particularly arduous approval process to simplify their criteria and implement automatic approvals for common cases. LCEs can also escalate pain points to the owners of common infrastructure and create a dialogue with the customers. By leveraging experience gained over the course of multiple previous launches, LCEs can devote more attention to individual concerns and suggestions.

Launching the Unexpected

When a project enters into a new product space or vertical, an LCE may need to create an appropriate checklist from scratch. Doing so often involves synthesizing experience from relevant domain experts. When drafting a new checklist, it can be helpful to structure the checklist around broad themes such as reliability, failure modes, and processes.
For example, before launching Android, Google had rarely dealt with mass consumer devices with client-side logic that we didn't directly control. While we can more or less easily fix a bug in Gmail within hours or days by pushing new versions of JavaScript to browsers, such fixes aren't an option with mobile devices. Therefore, LCEs working on mobile launches engaged mobile domain experts to determine which sections of existing checklists did or did not apply, and where new checklist questions were needed. In such conversations, it's important to keep the intent of each question in mind in order to avoid mindlessly applying a concrete question or action item that's not relevant to the design of the unique product being launched. An LCE facing an unusual launch must return to abstract first principles of how to execute a safe launch, then respecialize to make the checklist concrete and useful to developers.

Developing a Launch Checklist
A checklist is instrumental to launching new services and products with reproducible reliability. Our launch checklist grew over time and was periodically curated by members of the Launch Coordination Engineering team. The details of a launch checklist will be different for every company, because the specifics must be tailored to a company's internal services and infrastructure.

In the following sections, we extract a number of themes from Google's LCE checklists and provide examples of how such themes might be fleshed out.

Architecture and Dependencies

An architecture review allows you to determine if the service is using shared infrastructure correctly and identifies the owners of shared infrastructure as additional stakeholders in the launch. Google has a large number of internal services that are used as building blocks for new products. During later stages of capacity planning (see [Hix15a]), the list of dependencies identified in this section of the checklist can be used to make sure that every dependency is correctly provisioned.

Example checklist questions

What is your request flow from user to frontend to backend?
Are there different types of requests with different latency requirements?

Example action items

Isolate user-facing requests from non user-facing requests.
Validate request volume assumptions. One page view can turn into many requests.

Integration

Many companies' services run in an internal ecosystem that entails guidelines on how to set up machines, configure new services, set up monitoring, integrate with load balancing, set up DNS addresses, and so forth. These internal ecosystems usually grow over time, and often have their own idiosyncrasies and pitfalls to navigate. Thus, this section of the checklist will vary widely from company to company.

Example action items

Set up a new DNS name for your service. Set up load balancers to talk to your service.

Set up monitoring for your new service.

Capacity Planning

New features may exhibit a temporary increase in usage at launch that subsides within days. The type of workload or traffic mix from a launch spike could be substantially different from steady state, throwing off load test results. Public interest is notoriously hard to predict, and some Google products had to accommodate launch spikes up to 15 times higher than initially estimated. Launching initially in one region or country at a time helps develop the confidence to handle larger launches.
Capacity interacts with redundancy and availability. For instance, if you need three replicated deployments to serve 100% of your traffic at peak, you need to maintain four or five deployments, one or two of which are redundant, in order to shield users from maintenance and unexpected malfunctions. Datacenter and network resources often have a long lead time and need to be requested far enough in advance for your company to obtain them.

Example checklist questions

Is this launch tied to a press release, advertisement, blog post, or other form of promotion?
How much traffic and rate of growth do you expect during and after the launch?
Have you obtained all the compute resources needed to support your traffic?

Failure Modes

A systematic look at the possible failure modes of a new service ensures high reliability from the start. In this portion of the checklist, examine each component and dependency and identify the impact of its failure. Can the service deal with individual machine failures? Datacenter outages? Network failures? How do we deal with bad input data? Are we prepared for the possibility of a denial-of-service (DoS) attack? Can the service continue serving in degraded mode if one of its dependencies fails? How do we deal with unavailability of a dependency upon startup of the service? During runtime?

Example checklist questions

Do you have any single points of failure in your design? How do you mitigate unavailability of your dependencies?

Example action items

Implement request deadlines to avoid running out of resources for long- running requests.
Implement load shedding to reject new requests early in overload situations.

Client Behavior

On a traditional website, there is rarely a need to take abusive behavior from legitimate users into account. When every request is triggered by a user action such as a click on a link, the request rates are limited by how quickly users can click. To double the load, the number of users would have to double.
This axiom no longer holds when we consider clients that initiate actions without user input-for example, a cell phone app that periodically syncs its data into the cloud, or a website that periodically refreshes. In either of these scenarios, abusive client behavior can very easily threaten the stability of a service. (There is also the topic of protecting a service from abusive traffic such as scrapers and denial-of-service attacks-which is different from designing safe behavior for first-party clients.)

Example checklist question

Do you have auto-save/auto-complete/heartbeat functionality?

Example action items

Make sure that your client backs off exponentially on failure. Make sure that you jitter automatic requests.

Processes and Automation

Google encourages engineers to use standard tools to automate common processes. However, automation is never perfect, and every service has processes that need to be executed by a human: creating a new release, moving the service to a different data center, restoring data from backups, and so on. For reliability reasons, we strive to minimize single points of failure, which include humans.
These remaining processes should be documented before launch to ensure that the information is translated from an engineer's mind onto paper while it is still fresh, and that it is available in an emergency. Processes should be documented in such a way that any team member can execute a given process in an emergency.

Example checklist question

Are there any manual processes required to keep the service running?

Example action items

Document all manual processes.
Document the process for moving your service to a new datacenter. Automate the process for building and releasing a new version.

Development Process

Google is an extensive user of version control, and almost all development processes are deeply integrated with the version control system. Many of our best practices revolve around how to use the version control system effectively. For example, we perform most development on the mainline branch, but releases are built on separate branches per release. This setup makes it easy to fix bugs in a release without pulling in unrelated changes from the mainline.
Google also uses version control for other purposes, such as storing configuration files. Many of the advantages of version control-history tracking, attributing changes to individuals, and code reviews-apply to configuration files as well. In some cases, we also propagate changes from the version control system to the live servers automatically, so that an engineer only needs to submit a change to make it go live.

Example action items

Check all code and configuration files into the version control system. Cut each release on a new release branch.

External Dependencies

Sometimes a launch depends on factors beyond company control. Identifying these factors allows you to mitigate the unpredictability they entail. For instance, the dependency may be a code library maintained by third parties, or a service or data provided by another company. When a vendor outage, bug, systematic error, security issue, or unexpected scalability limit actually occurs, prior planning will enable you to avert or mitigate damage to your users. In Google's history of launches, we've used filtering and/or rewriting proxies, data transcoding pipelines, and caches to mitigate some of these risks.

Example checklist questions

What third-party code, data, services, or events does the service or the launch depend upon?
Do any partners depend on your service? If so, do they need to be notified of your launch?
What happens if you or the vendor can't meet a hard launch deadline?

Rollout Planning

In large distributed systems, few events happen instantaneously. For reasons of reliability, such immediacy isn't usually ideal anyway. A complicated launch might require enabling individual features on a number of different subsystems, and each of those configuration changes might take hours to complete. Having a working configuration in a test instance doesn't guarantee that the same configuration can be rolled out to the live instance. Sometimes a complicated dance or special functionality is required to make all components launch cleanly and in the correct order.
External requirements from teams like marketing and PR might add further complications. For example, a team might need a feature to be available in time for the keynote at a conference, but need to keep the feature invisible before the

keynote.

Contingency measures are another part of rollout planning. What if you don't manage to enable the feature in time for the keynote? Sometimes these contingency measures are as simple as preparing a backup slide deck that says, "We will be launching this feature over the next days" rather than "We have launched this feature."

Example action items

Set up a launch plan that identifies actions to take to launch the service. Identify who is responsible for each item.
Identify risk in the individual launch steps and implement contingency measures.

Selected Techniques for Reliable Launches
As described in other parts of this book, Google has developed a number of techniques for running reliable systems over the years. Some of these techniques are particularly well suited to launching products safely. They also provide advantages during regular operation of the service, but it's particularly important to get them right during the launch phase.

Gradual and Staged Rollouts

One adage of system administration is "never change a running system." Any change represents risk, and risk should be minimized in order to assure reliability of a system. What's true for any small system is doubly true for highly replicated, globally distributed systems like those run by Google.
Very few launches at Google are of the "push-button" variety, in which we launch a new product at a specific time for the entire world to use. Over time, Google has developed a number of patterns that allow us to launch products and features gradually and thereby minimize risk; see A Collection of Best Practices for Production Services.
Almost all updates to Google's services proceed gradually, according to a defined process, with appropriate verification steps interspersed. A new server

might be installed on a few machines in one datacenter and observed for a defined period of time. If all looks well, the server is installed on all machines in one datacenter, observed again, and then installed on all machines globally. The first stages of a rollout are usually called "canaries"-an allusion to canaries carried by miners into a coal mine to detect dangerous gases. Our canary servers detect dangerous effects from the behavior of the new software under real user traffic.
Canary testing is a concept embedded into many of Google's internal tools used to make automated changes, as well as for systems that change configuration files. Tools that manage the installation of new software typically observe the newly started server for a while, making sure that the server doesn't crash or otherwise misbehave. If the change doesn't pass the validation period, it's automatically rolled back.
The concept of gradual rollouts even applies to software that does not run on Google's servers. New versions of an Android app can be rolled out in a gradual manner, in which the updated version is offered to a subset of the installs for upgrade. The percentage of upgraded instances gradually increases over time until it reaches 100%. This type of rollout is particularly helpful if the new version results in additional traffic to the backend servers in Google's datacenters. This way, we can observe the effect on our servers as we gradually roll out the new version and detect problems early.
The invite system is another type of gradual rollout. Frequently, rather than allowing free signups to a new service, only a limited number of users are allowed to sign up per day. Rate-limited signups are often coupled with an invite system, in which a user can send a limited number of invites to friends.

Feature Flag Frameworks

Google often augments prelaunch testing with strategies that mitigate the risk of an outage. A mechanism to roll out changes slowly, allowing for observation of total system behavior under real workloads, can pay for its engineering investment in reliability, engineering velocity, and time to market. These mechanisms have proven particularly useful in cases where realistic test environments are impractical, or for particularly complex launches for which the effects can be hard to predict.

Furthermore, not all changes are equal. Sometimes you simply want to check whether a small tweak to the user interface improves the experience of your users. Such small changes shouldn't involve thousands of lines of code or a heavyweight launch process. You may want to test hundreds of such changes in parallel.
Finally, sometimes you want to find out whether a small sample of users like using an early prototype of a new, hard-to-implement feature. You don't want to spend months of engineering effort to harden a new feature to serve millions of users, only to find that the feature is a flop.
To accommodate the preceding scenarios, several Google products devised feature flag frameworks. Some of those frameworks were designed to roll out new features gradually from 0% to 100% of users. Whenever a product introduced any such framework, the framework itself was hardened as much as possible so that most of its applications would not need any LCE involvement. Such frameworks usually meet the following requirements:
Roll out many changes in parallel, each to a few servers, users, entities, or datacenters
Gradually increase to a larger but limited group of users, usually between 1 and 10 percent
Direct traffic through different servers depending on users, sessions, objects, and/or locations
Automatically handle failure of the new code paths by design, without affecting users
Independently revert each such change immediately in the event of serious bugs or side effects
    Measure the extent to which each change improves the user experience Google's feature flag frameworks fall into two general classes:
Those that primarily facilitate user interface improvements
Those that support arbitrary server-side and business logic changes

The simplest feature flag framework for user interface changes in a stateless service is an HTTP payload rewriter at frontend application servers, limited to a subset of cookies or another similar HTTP request/response attribute. A configuration mechanism may specify an identifier associated with the new code

paths and the scope of the change (e.g., cookie hash mod range), whitelists, and blacklists.
Stateful services tend to limit feature flags to a subset of unique logged-in user identifiers or to the actual product entities accessed, such as the ID of documents, spreadsheets, or storage objects. Rather than rewrite HTTP payloads, stateful services are more likely to proxy or reroute requests to different servers depending on the change, conferring the ability to test improved business logic and more complex new features.

Dealing with Abusive Client Behavior

The simplest example of abusive client behavior is a misjudgment of update rates. A new client that syncs every 60 seconds, as opposed to every 600 seconds, causes 10 times the load on the service. Retry behavior has a number of pitfalls that affect user-initiated requests, as well as client-initiated requests. Take the example of a service that is overloaded and is therefore failing some requests: if the clients retry the failed requests, they add load to an already overloaded service, resulting in more retries and even more requests. Instead, clients need to reduce the frequency of retries, usually by adding exponentially increasing delay between retries, in addition to carefully considering the types of errors that warrant a retry. For example, a network error usually warrants a retry, but a 4xx HTTP error (which indicates an error on the client's side) usually does not.
Intentional or inadvertent synchronization of automated requests in a thundering herd (much like those described in Chapters Distributed Periodic Scheduling with Cron and Data Processing Pipelines) is another common example of abusive client behavior. A phone app developer might decide that 2 a.m. is a good time to download updates, because the user is most likely asleep and won't be inconvenienced by the download. However, such a design results in a barrage of requests to the download server at 2 a.m. every night, and almost no requests at any other time. Instead, every client should choose the time for this type of request randomly.
Randomness also needs to be injected into other periodic processes. To return to the previously mentioned retries: let's take the example of a client that sends a request, and when it encounters a failure, retries after 1 second, then 2 seconds, then 4 seconds, and so on. Without randomness, a brief request spike that leads

to an increased error rate could repeat itself due to retries after 1 second, then 2 seconds, then 4 seconds. In order to even out these synchronized events, each delay needs to be jittered (that is, adjusted by a random amount).
The ability to control the behavior of a client from the server side has proven an important tool in the past. For an app on a device, such control might mean instructing the client to check in periodically with the server and download a configuration file. The file might enable or disable certain features or set parameters, such as how often the client syncs or how often it retries.
The client configuration might even enable completely new user-facing functionality. By hosting the code that supports new functionality in the client application before we activate that feature, we greatly reduce the risk associated with a launch. Releasing a new version becomes much easier if we don't need to maintain parallel release tracks for a version with the new functionality versus without the functionality. This holds particularly true if we're not dealing with a single piece of new functionality, but a set of independent features that might be released on different schedules, which would necessitate maintaining a combinatorial explosion of different versions.
Having this sort of dormant functionality also makes aborting launches easier when adverse effects are discovered during a rollout. In such cases, we can simply switch the feature off, iterate, and release an updated version of the app. Without this type of client configuration, we would have to provide a new version of the app without the feature, and update the app on all users' phones.

Overload Behavior and Load Tests

Overload situations are a particularly complex failure mode, and therefore deserve additional attention. Runaway success is usually the most welcome cause of overload when a new service launches, but there are myriad other causes, including load balancing failures, machine outages, synchronized client behavior, and external attacks.
A naive model assumes that CPU usage on a machine providing a particular service scales linearly with the load (for example, number of requests or amount of data processed), and once available CPU is exhausted, processing simply becomes slower. Unfortunately, services rarely behave in this ideal fashion in the real world. Many services are much slower when they are not loaded, usually

due to the effect of various kinds of caches such as CPU caches, JIT caches, and service-specific data caches. As load increases, there is usually a window in which CPU usage and load on the service correspond linearly, and response times stay mostly constant.
At some point, many services reach a point of nonlinearity as they approach overload. In the most benign cases, response times simply begin to increase, resulting in a degraded user experience but not necessarily causing an outage (although a slow dependency might cause user-visible errors up the stack, due to exceeded RPC deadlines). In the most drastic cases, a service locks up completely in response to overload.
To cite a specific example of overload behavior: a service logged debugging information in response to backend errors. It turned out that logging debugging information was more expensive than handling the backend response in a normal case. Therefore, as the service became overloaded and timed out backend responses inside its own RPC stack, the service spent even more CPU time logging these responses, timing out more requests in the meantime until the service ground to a complete halt. In services running on the Java Virtual Machine (JVM), a similar effect of grinding to a halt is sometimes called "GC (garbage collection) thrashing." In this scenario, the virtual machine's internal memory management runs in increasingly closer cycles, trying to free up memory until most of the CPU time is consumed by memory management.
Unfortunately, it is very hard to predict from first principles how a service will react to overload. Therefore, load tests are an invaluable tool, both for reliability reasons and capacity planning, and load testing is required for most launches.

Development of LCE
In Google's formative years, the size of the engineering team doubled every year for several years in a row, fragmenting the engineering department into many small teams working on many experimental new products and features. In such a climate, novice engineers run the risk of repeating the mistakes of their predecessors, especially when it comes to launching new features and products successfully.
To mitigate the repetition of such mistakes by capturing the lessons learned from past launches, a small band of experienced engineers, called the "Launch

Engineers," volunteered to act as a consulting team. The Launch Engineers developed checklists for new product launches, covering topics such as:
When to consult with the legal department How to select domain names
How to register new domains without misconfiguring DNS Common engineering design and production deployment pitfalls
"Launch Reviews," as the Launch Engineers' consulting sessions came to be called, became a common practice days to weeks before the launch of many new products.
Within two years, the product deployment requirements in the launch checklist grew long and complex. Combined with the increasing complexity of Google's deployment environment, it became more and more challenging for product engineers to stay up-to-date on how to make changes safely. At the same time, the SRE organization was growing quickly, and inexperienced SREs were sometimes overly cautious and averse to change. Google ran a risk that the resulting negotiations between these two parties would reduce the velocity of product/feature launches.
To mitigate this scenario from the engineering perspective, SRE staffed a small, full-time team of LCEs in 2004. They were responsible for accelerating the launches of new products and features, while at the same time applying SRE expertise to ensure that Google shipped reliable products with high availability and low latency.
LCEs were responsible for making sure launches were executing quickly without the services falling over, and that if a launch did fail, it didn't take down other products. LCEs were also responsible for keeping stakeholders informed of the nature and likelihood of such failures whenever corners were cut in order to accelerate time to market. Their consulting sessions were formalized as Production Reviews.

Evolution of the LCE Checklist

As Google's environment grew more complex, so did both the Launch Coordination Engineering checklist (see Launch Coordination Checklist) and the volume of launches. In 3.5 years, one LCE ran 350 launches through the LCE

Checklist. As the team averaged five engineers during this time period, this translates into a Google launch throughput of over 1,500 launches in 3.5 years!
While each question on the LCE Checklist is simple, much complexity is built in to what prompted the question and the implications of its answer. In order to fully understand this degree of complexity, a new LCE hire requires about six months of training.
As the volume of launches grew, keeping pace with the annual doubling of Google's engineering team, LCEs sought ways to streamline their reviews. LCEs identified categories of low-risk launches that were highly unlikely to face or cause mishaps. For example, a feature launch involving no new server executables and a traffic increase under 10% would be deemed low risk. Such launches were faced with an almost trivial checklist, while higher-risk launches underwent the full gamut of checks and balances. By 2008, 30% of reviews were considered low-risk.
Simultaneously, Google's environment was scaling up, removing constraints on many launches. For instance, the acquisition of YouTube forced Google to build out its network and utilize bandwidth more efficiently. This meant that many smaller products would "fit within the cracks," avoiding complex network capacity planning and provisioning processes, thus accelerating their launches. Google also began building very large datacenters capable of hosting several dependent services under one roof. This development simplified the launch of new products that needed large amounts of capacity at multiple preexisting services upon which they depended.

Problems LCE Didn't Solve

Although LCEs tried to keep the bureaucracy of reviews to a minimum, such efforts were insufficient. By 2009, the difficulties of launching a small new service at Google had become a legend. Services that grew to a larger scale faced their own set of problems that Launch Coordination could not solve.

Scalability changes

When products are successful far beyond any early estimates, and their usage increases by more than two orders of magnitude, keeping pace with their load necessitates many design changes. Such scalability changes, combined with

ongoing feature additions, often make the product more complex, fragile, and difficult to operate. At some point, the original product architecture becomes unmanageable and the product needs to be completely rearchitected. Rearchitecting the product and then migrating all users from the old to the new architecture requires a large investment of time and resources from developers and SREs alike, slowing down the rate of new feature development during that period.

Growing operational load

When running a service after it launches, operational load, the amount of manual and repetitive engineering needed to keep a system functioning, tends to grow over time unless efforts are made to control such load. Noisiness of automated notifications, complexity of deployment procedures, and the overhead of manual maintenance work tend to increase over time and consume increasing amounts of the service owner's bandwidth, leaving the team less time for feature development. SRE has an internally advertised goal of keeping operational work below a maximum of 50%; see Eliminating Toil. Staying below this maximum requires constant tracking of sources of operational work, as well as directed effort to remove these sources.

Infrastructure churn

If the underlying infrastructure (such as systems for cluster management, storage, monitoring, load balancing, and data transfer) is changing due to active development by infrastructure teams, the owners of services running on the infrastructure must invest large amounts of work to simply keep up with the infrastructure changes. As infrastructure features upon which services rely are deprecated and replaced by new features, service owners must continually modify their configurations and rebuild their executables, consequently "running fast just to stay in the same place." The solution to this scenario is to enact some type of churn reduction policy that prohibits infrastructure engineers from releasing backward-incompatible features until they also automate the migration of their clients to the new feature. Creating automated migration tools to accompany new features minimizes the work imposed on service owners to keep up with infrastructure churn.
Solving these problems requires company-wide efforts that are far beyond the

scope of LCE: a combination of better platform APIs and frameworks (see The Evolving SRE Engagement Model), continuous build and test automation, and better standardization and automation across Google's production services.

Conclusion
Companies undergoing rapid growth with a high rate of change to products and services may benefit from the equivalent of a Launch Coordination Engineering role. Such a team is especially valuable if a company plans to double its product developers every one or two years, if it must scale its services to hundreds of millions of users, and if reliability despite a high rate of change is important to its users.
The LCE team was Google's solution to the problem of achieving safety without impeding change. This chapter introduced some of the experiences accumulated by our unique LCE role over a 10-year period under exactly such circumstances. We hope that our approach will help inspire others facing similar challenges in their respective organizations.

Part IV - Management
Our final selection of topics covers working together in a team, and working as teams. No SRE is an island, and there are some distinctive ways in which we work.
Any organization that aspires to be serious about running an effective SRE arm needs to consider training. Teaching SREs how to think in a complicated and fast-changing environment with a well-thought-out and well-executed training program has the promise of instilling best practices within a new hire's first few weeks or months that otherwise would take months or years to accumulate. We discuss strategies for doing just that in Accelerating SREs to On-Call and Beyond.
As anyone in the operations world knows, responsibility for any significant service comes with a lot of interruptions: production getting in a bad state, people requesting updates to their favorite binary, a long queue of consultation requests...managing interrupts under turbulent conditions is a necessary skill, as we'll discuss in Dealing with Interrupts.
If the turbulent conditions have persisted for long enough, an SRE team needs to start recovering from operational overload. We have just the flight plan for you in Embedding an SRE to Recover from Operational Overload.
We write in Communication and Collaboration in SRE, about the different roles within SRE; cross-team, cross-site, and cross-continent communication; running production meetings; and case studies of how SRE has collaborated well.
Finally, The Evolving SRE Engagement Model, examines a cornerstone of the operation of SRE: the production readiness review (PRR), a crucial step in onboarding a new service. We discuss how to conduct PRRs, and how to move beyond this successful, but also limited, model.
Further Reading from Google SRE

Building reliable systems requires a carefully calibrated mix of skills, ranging from software development to the arguably less-well-known systems analysis

and engineering disciplines. We write about the latter disciplines in "The Systems Engineering Side of Site Reliability Engineering" [Hix15b].
Hiring SREs well is critical to having a high-functioning reliability organization, as explored in "Hiring Site Reliability Engineers" [Jon15]. Google's hiring practices have been detailed in texts like Work Rules! [Boc15],134 but hiring SREs has its own set of particularities. Even by Google's overall standards, SRE
candidates are difficult to find and even harder to interview effectively.

Chapter 28 - Accelerating SREs to On-Call and Beyond
How Can I Strap a Jetpack to My Newbies While Keeping Senior SREs Up to Speed?
Written by Andrew WiddowsonEdited by Shylaja Nukala

You've Hired Your Next SRE(s), Now What?
You've hired new employees into your organization, and they're starting as Site Reliability Engineers. Now you have to train them on the job. Investing up front in the education and technical orientation of new SREs will shape them into better engineers. Such training will accelerate them to a state of proficiency faster, while making their skill set more robust and balanced.
Successful SRE teams are built on trust-in order to maintain a service consistently and globally, you need to trust that your fellow on-callers know how your system works,135 can diagnose atypical system behaviors, are comfortable with reaching out for help, and can react under pressure to save the day. It is
essential, then, but not sufficient, to think of SRE education through the lens of, "What does a newbie need to learn to go on-call?" Given the requirements regarding trust, you also need to ask questions like:
How can my existing on-callers assess the readiness of the newbie for on- call?
How can we harness the enthusiasm and curiosity in our new hires to make sure that existing SREs benefit from it?
What activities can I commit our team to that benefit everyone's education, but that everyone will like?
Students have a wide range of learning preferences. Recognizing that you will hire people who have a mix of these preferences, it would be shortsighted to only cater to one style at the expense of the others. Thus, there is no style of education that works best to train new SREs, and there is certainly no one magic

formula that will work for all SRE teams. Table 28-1 lists recommended training practices (and their corresponding anti-patterns) that are well known to SRE at Google. These practices represent a wide range of options available for making your team well educated in SRE concepts, both now and on an ongoing basis.
Table 28-1. SRE education practices
Recommended patterns	Anti-patterns


Designing concrete, sequential learning experiences for students to follow

Deluging students with menial work (e.g., alert/ticket triage) to train them; "trial by fire"




Encouraging reverse engineering, statistical thinking, and working from fundamental principles

Training strictly through operator procedures, checklists, and playbooks




Celebrating the analysis of failure by suggesting postmortems for students to read

Treating outages as secrets to be buried in order to avoid blame




Creating contained but realistic breakages for students to fix using real monitoring and tooling

Having the first chance to fix something only occur after a student is already on-call



Role-playing theoretical disasters as a	Creating experts on the team whose
group, to intermingle a team's problem- techniques and knowledge are
solving approaches	compartmentalized



Enabling students to shadow their on- call rotation early, comparing notes with the on-caller

Pushing students into being primary on-call before they achieve a holistic understanding of their service




Pairing students with expert SREs to revise targeted sections of the on-call

Treating on-call training plans as static and untouchable except by subject

training plan	matter experts



Carving out nontrivial project work for students to undertake, allowing them to gain partial ownership in the stack

Awarding all new project work to the most senior SREs, leaving junior SREs to pick up the scraps



The rest of this chapter presents major themes that we have found to be effective in accelerating SREs to on-call and beyond. These concepts can be visualized in a blueprint for bootstrapping SREs (Figure 28-1).

Figure 28-1. A blueprint for bootstrapping an SRE to on-call and beyond

This illustration captures best practices that SRE teams can pick from to help

bootstrap new members, while keeping senior talent fresh. From the many tools here, you can pick and choose the activities that best suit your team.
The illustration has two axes:

The x-axis represents the spectrum between different types of work, ranging from abstract to applied activities.
The y-axis represents time. Read from the top down, new SREs have very little knowledge about the systems and services they'll be responsible for, so postmortems detailing how these systems have failed in the past are a good starting point. New SREs can also try to reverse engineer systems from fundamentals, since they're starting from zero. Once they understand more about their systems and have done some hands-on work, SREs are ready to shadow on-call and to start mending incomplete or out-of-date documentation.
Tips for interpreting this illustration:

Going on-call is a milestone in a new SRE's career, after which point learning becomes a lot more nebulous, undefined, and self-directed-hence the dashed lines around activities that happen at or after the SRE goes on- call.
The triangular shape of project work & ownership indicates that project work starts out small and builds over time, becoming more complex and likely continuing well after going on-call.
Some of these activities and practices are very abstract/passive, and some are very applied/active. A few activities are mixes of both. It's good to have a variety of learning modalities to suit different learning styles.
For maximum effect, training activities and practices should be appropriately paced: some are appropriate to undertake straightaway, some should happen right before an SRE officially goes on-call, and some should be continual and ongoing even by seasoned SREs. Concrete learning experiences should happen for the entire time leading up to the SRE going on-call.

Initial Learning Experiences: The Case for Structure Over Chaos

As discussed elsewhere in this book, SRE teams undertake a natural mix of proactive136 and reactive137 work. It should be a strong goal of every SRE team to contain and reduce reactive work through ample proactivity, and the approach you take to onboarding your newbie(s) should be no exception. Consider the
following all-too-common, but sadly suboptimal, onboarding process:

John is the newest member of the FooServer SRE team. Senior SREs on this team are tasked with a lot of grunt work, such as responding to tickets, dealing with alerts, and performing tedious binary rollouts. On John's first day on the job, he is assigned all new incoming tickets. He is told that he can ask any member of the SRE team to help him obtain the background necessary to decipher a ticket. 'Sure, there will be a lot of upfront learning that you'll have to do,' says John's manager. 'But eventually you'll get much faster at these tickets. One day, it will just click and you'll know a lot about all of the tools we use, the procedures we follow, and the systems we maintain.' A senior team member comments, 'We're throwing you in the deep end of the pool here.'
This "trial by fire" method of orienting one's newbies is often born out of a team's current environment; ops-driven, reactive SRE teams "train" their newest members by making them...well, react! Over and over again. If you're lucky, the engineers who are already good at navigating ambiguity will crawl out of the hole you've put them in. But chances are, this strategy has alienated several capable engineers. While such an approach may eventually produce great operations employees, its results will fall short of the mark. The trial-by-fire approach also presumes that many or most aspects of a team can be taught strictly by doing, rather than by reasoning. If the set of work one encounters in a tickets queue will adequately provide training for said job, then this is not an SRE position.
SRE students will have questions like the following: What am I working on?
How much progress have I made?
When will these activities accumulate enough experience for me to go on- call?
Making the jump from a previous company or university, while changing job roles (from traditional software engineer or traditional systems administrator) to

this nebulous Site Reliability Engineer role is often enough to knock students' confidence down several times. For more introspective personalities (especially regarding questions #2 and #3), the uncertainties incurred by nebulous or less- than-clear answers can lead to slower development or retention problems. Instead, consider the approaches outlined in the following sections. These suggestions are as concrete as any ticket or alert, but they are also sequential, and thus far more rewarding.

Learning Paths That Are Cumulative and Orderly

Put some amount of learning order into your system(s) so that your new SREs see a path before them. Any type of training is better than random tickets and interrupts, but do make a conscious effort to combine the right mix of theory and application: abstract concepts that will recur multiple times in a newbie's journey should be frontloaded in their education, while the student should also receive hands-on experience as soon as practically possible.
Learning about your stack(s) and subsystem(s) requires a starting point. Consider whether it makes more sense to group trainings together by similarity of purpose, or by normal-case order of execution. For example, if your team is responsible for a real-time, user-facing serving stack, consider a curriculum order like the following:
1) How a query enters the system

Networking and datacenter fundamentals, frontend load balancing, proxies, etc.
2) Frontend serving

Application frontend(s), query logging, user experience SLO(s), etc.

3) Mid-tier services

Caches, backend load balancing

4) Infrastructure

Backends, infrastructure, and compute resources

5) Tying it all together

Debugging techniques, escalation procedures, and emergency scenarios

How you choose to present the learning opportunities (informal whiteboard chats, formal lectures, or hands-on discovery exercises) is up to you and the SREs helping you structure, design, and deliver training. The Google Search SRE team structures this learning through a document called the "on-call learning checklist." A simplified section of an on-call learning checklist might look like the following:

The Results Mixing Server ("Mixer")


Frontended by: Frontend server

Backends called: Results Retrieval Server,
Geolocation Server, Personalization Database
SRE experts: Sally W, Dave K, Jen P

Developer contacts: Jim T, results- team@



Know before moving on:

Which clusters have Mixer deployed
How to roll back a Mixer release Which backends of Mixer are considered "critical path" and why




Read and understand the following docs:
Results Mixing Overview: "Query execution" section
Results Mixing Overview: "Production" section
Playbook: How to Roll Out a New Results Mixing Server
A Performance Analysis of Mixer


Comprehension questions:

Q: How does the release schedule change if a company holiday occurs on the normal release build day?
Q: How can you fix a bad push of the geolocation dataset?



Note that the preceding section does not directly encode procedures, diagnostic

steps, or playbooks; instead, it's a relatively future-proof write-up focusing strictly on enumerating expert contacts, highlighting the most useful documentation resources, establishing basic knowledge you must gather and internalize, and asking probing questions that can only be answered once that basic knowledge has been absorbed. It also provides concrete outcomes, so that the student knows what kinds of knowledge and skills they will have gained from completing this section of the learning checklist.
It's a good idea for all interested parties to get a sense of how much information the trainee is retaining. While this feedback mechanism perhaps doesn't need to be as formal as a quiz, it is a good practice to have complete bits of homework that pose questions about how your service(s) work. Satisfactory answers, checked by a student's mentor, are a sign that learning should continue to the next phase. Questions about the inner workings of your service might look similar to the following:
Which backends of this server are considered "in the critical path," and why?
What aspects of this server could be simplified or automated?
Where do you think the first bottleneck is in this architecture? If that bottleneck were to be saturated, what steps could you take to alleviate it?
Depending on how the access permissions are configured for your service, you can also consider implementing a tiered access model. The first tier of access would allow your student read-only access to the inner workings of the components, and a later tier would permit them to mutate the production state. Completing sections of the on-call learning checklist satisfactorily would earn the student progressively deeper access to the system. The Search SRE team
calls these attained levels "powerups"138 on the route to on-call, as trainees are eventually added into the highest level of systems access.

Targeted Project Work, Not Menial Work

SREs are problem solvers, so give them a hearty problem to solve! When starting out, having even a minor sense of ownership in the team's service can do wonders for learning. In the reverse, such ownership can also make great inroads for trust building among senior colleagues, because they will approach their junior colleague to learn about the new component(s) or processes. Early opportunities for ownership are standard across Google in general: all engineers

are given a starter project that's meant to provide a tour through the infrastructure sufficient to enable them to make a small but useful contribution early. Having the new SRE split time between learning and project work will also give them a sense of purpose and productivity, which would not happen if they spent time only on learning or project work. Several starter project patterns that seem to work well include:
Making a trivial user-visible feature change in a serving stack, and subsequently shepherding the feature release all the way through to production. Understanding both the development toolchain and the binary release process encourages empathy for the developers.
Adding monitoring to your service where there are currently blind spots. The newbie will have to reason with the monitoring logic, while reconciling their understanding of a system with how it actually (mis)behaves.
Automating a pain point that isn't quite painful enough to have been automated already, providing the new SRE with an appreciation for the value SREs place on removing toil from our day-to-day operations.

Creating Stellar Reverse Engineers and Improvisational Thinkers
We can propose a set of guidelines for how to train new SREs, but what should we train them on? Training material will depend on the technologies being used on the job, but the more important question is: what kind of engineers are we trying to create? At the scale and complexity at which SREs operate, they cannot afford to merely be operations-focused, traditional system administrators. In addition to having a large-scale engineering mindset, SREs should exhibit the following characteristics:
In the course of their jobs, they will come across systems they've never seen before, so they need to have strong reverse engineering skills.
At scale, there will be anomalies that are hard to detect, so they'll need the ability to think statistically, rather than procedurally, to uncloak problems.
When standard operating procedures break down, they'll need to be able to
improvise fully.

Let's examine these attributes further, so that we can understand how to equip our SREs for these skills and behaviors.

Reverse Engineers: Figuring Out How Things Work

Engineers are curious about how systems they've never seen before work-or, more likely, how the current versions of systems they used to know quite well work. By having a baseline understanding of how systems work at your company, along with a willingness to dig deep into the debugging tools, RPC boundaries, and logs of your binaries to unearth their flows, SREs will become more efficient at homing in on unexpected problems in unexpected system architectures. Teach your SREs about the diagnostic and debugging surfaces of your applications and have them practice drawing inferences from the information these surfaces reveal, so that such behavior becomes reflexive when dealing with future outages.

Statistical and Comparative Thinkers: Stewards of the Scientific Method Under Pressure

You can think of an SRE's approach to incident response for large-scale systems as navigating through a massive decision tree unfolding in front of them. In the limited time window afforded by the demands of incident response, the SRE can take a few actions out of hundreds with the goal of mitigating the outage, either in the short term or the long term. Because time is often of the utmost importance, the SRE has to effectively and efficiently prune this decision tree. The ability to do so is partially gained through experience, which only comes with time and exposure to a breadth of production systems. This experience must be paired with careful construction of hypotheses that, when proven or disproven, even further narrow down that decision space. Put another way, tracking down system breakages is often akin to playing a game of "which of these things is not like the other?" where "things" might entail kernel version, CPU architecture, binary version(s) in your stack, regional traffic mix, or a hundred other factors. Architecturally, it's the team's responsibility to ensure all of these factors can be controlled for and individually analyzed and compared. However, we should also train our newest SREs to become good analysts and comparators from their earliest moments on the job.

Improv Artists: When the Unexpected Happens

You try out a fix for the breakage, but it doesn't work. The developer(s) behind the failing system are nowhere to be found. What do you do now? You

improvise! Learning multiple tools that can solve parts of your problem allows you to practice defense in depth in your own problem-solving behaviors. Being too procedural in the face of an outage, thus forgetting your analytical skills, can be the difference between getting stuck and finding the root cause. A case of bogged-down troubleshooting can be further compounded when an SRE brings too many untested assumptions about the cause of an outage into their decision making. Demonstrating that there are many analytical traps that SREs can fall into, which require "zooming out" and taking a different approach to resolution, is a valuable lesson for SREs to learn early on.
Given these three aspirational attributes of high-performing SREs, what courses and experiences can we provide new SREs in order to send them along a path in the right direction? You need to come up with your own course content that embodies these attributes, in addition to the other attributes specific to your SRE culture. Let's consider one class that we believe hits all of the aforementioned points.

Tying This Together: Reverse Engineering a Production Service

When it came time to learn [part of the Google Maps stack], [a new SRE] asked if, rather than passively having someone explain the service, she could do this herself-learning everything via reverse engineering class techniques, and having the rest of us correct her/fill in the blanks for whatever she missed or got wrong. The result? Well, it was probably more correct and useful than it would have been if I'd given the talk, and I've been on-call for this for over 5 years!
Paul Cowan, Google Site Reliability Engineer

One popular class we offer at Google is called "Reverse Engineering a Production Service (without help from its owners)." The problem scenario presented appears simple at first. The entire Google News Team-SRE, Software Engineers, Product Management, and so forth-has gone on a company trip: a cruise of the Bermuda Triangle. We haven't heard from the team for 30 days, so our students are the newly appointed Google News SRE Team. They need to figure out how the serving stack works from end-to-end in order to commandeer it and keep it running.
After being given this scenario, the students are led through interactive, purpose-

driven exercises in which they trace the inbound path of their web browser's query through Google's infrastructure. At each stage in the process, we emphasize that it is important to learn multiple ways to discover the connectivity between production servers, so that connections are not missed. In the middle of the class, we challenge the students to find another endpoint for the incoming traffic, demonstrating that our initial assumption was too narrowly scoped. We then challenge our students to find other ways into the stack. We exploit the highly instrumented nature of our production binaries, which self-report their RPC connectivity, as well as our available white-box and black-box monitoring,
to determine which path(s) users' queries take.139 Along the way, we build a system diagram and also discuss components that are shared infrastructure that our students are likely to see again in the future.
At the end of the class, the students are charged with a task. Each student returns to their home team and asks a senior SRE to help them select a stack or slice of a stack for which they'll be on-call. Using the skills learned in classes, the student then diagrams that stack on their own and presents their findings to the senior SRE. Undoubtedly the student will miss a few subtle details, which will make for a good discussion. It's also likely that the senior SRE will learn something from the exercise as well, exposing drifts in their prior understanding of the ever-changing system. Because of the rapid change of production systems, it is important that your team welcome any chance to refamiliarize themselves with a system, including by learning from the newest, rather than oldest, members of the team.

Five Practices for Aspiring On-Callers
Being on-call is not the single most important purpose of any SRE, but production engineering responsibilities usually do involve some kind of urgent notification coverage. Someone who is capable of responsibly taking on-call is someone who understands the system that they work on to a reasonable depth and breadth. So we'll use "able to take on-call" as a useful proxy for "knows enough and can figure out the rest."

A Hunger for Failure: Reading and Sharing Postmortems

Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it.

George Santayana, philosopher and essayist

Postmortems (see Postmortem Culture: Learning from Failure) are an important part of continuous improvement. They are a blame-free way of getting at the many root causes of a significant or visible outage. When writing a postmortem, keep in mind that its most appreciative audience might be an engineer who hasn't yet been hired. Without radical editing, subtle changes can be made to our best postmortems to make them "teachable" postmortems.
Even the best postmortems aren't helpful if they languish in the bottom of a virtual filing cabinet. It then follows that your team should collect and curate valuable postmortems to serve as educational resources for future newbies. Some postmortems are rote, but "teachable postmortems" that provide insights into structural or novel failures of large-scale systems are as good as gold for new students.
Ownership of postmortems isn't limited just to authorship. It's a point of pride for many teams to have survived and documented their largest outages. Collect your best postmortems and make them prominently available for your newbies- in addition to interested parties from related and/or integrating teams-to read. Ask related teams to publish their best postmortems where you can access them.
Some SRE teams at Google run "postmortem reading clubs" where fascinating and insightful postmortems are circulated, pre-read, and then discussed. The original author(s) of the postmortem can be the guest(s) of honor at the meeting. Other teams organize "tales of fail" gatherings where the postmortem author(s) semiformally present, recounting the outage and effectively driving the discussion themselves.
Regular readings or presentations on outages, including trigger conditions and mitigation steps, do wonders for building a new SRE's mental map and understanding of production and on-call response. Postmortems are also excellent fuel for future abstract disaster scenarios.

Disaster Role Playing

Once a week we have a meeting where a victim is chosen to be on the spot in front of the group, and a scenario-often a real one taken from the annals of Google history-is thrown at him or her. The victim, whom I think of as

a game show contestant, tells the game show host what s/he would do or query to understand or solve the problem, and the host tells the victim what happens with each action or observation. It's like SRE Zork. You are in a maze of twisty monitoring consoles, all alike. You must save innocent users from slipping into the Chasm of Excessive Query Latency, save datacenters from Near-Certain Meltdown, and spare us all the embarrassment of Erroneous Google Doodle Display.
Robert Kennedy, former Site Reliability Engineer for Google Search and healthcare.gov140
When you have a group of SREs of wildly different experience levels, what can you do to bring them all together, and enable them to learn from each other? How do you impress the SRE culture and problem-solving nature of your team upon a newbie, while also keeping grizzled veterans apprised of new changes and features in your stack? Google SRE teams address these challenges through a time-honored tradition of regular disaster role playing. Among other names, this exercise is commonly referred to as "Wheel of Misfortune" or "Walk the Plank." The sense of humorous danger such titles lend the exercise makes it less intimidating to freshly hired SREs.
At its best, these exercises become a weekly ritual in which every member of the group learns something. The formula is straightforward and bears some resemblance to a tabletop RPG (Role Playing Game): the "game master" (GM) picks two team members to be primary and secondary on-call; these two SREs join the GM at the front of the room. An incoming page is announced, and the on-call team responds with what they would do to mitigate and investigate the outage.
The GM has carefully prepared a scenario that is about to unfold. This scenario might be based upon a previous outage for which the newer team members weren't around or that older team members have forgotten. Or perhaps the scenario is a foray into a hypothetical breakage of a new or soon-to-be-launched feature in the stack, rendering all members of the room equally unprepared to grapple with the situation. Better still, a coworker might find a new and novel breakage in production, and today's scenario expands on this new threat.
Over the next 30-60 minutes, the primary and secondary on-callers attempt to root-cause the issue. The GM happily provides additional context as the problem

unfolds, perhaps informing the on-callers (and their audience) of what the graphs on their monitoring dashboard might look like during the outage. If the incident requires escalation outside of the home team, the GM pretends to be a member of that other team for the purposes of the scenario. No virtual scenario will be perfect, so at times the GM may have to steer participants back on track by redirecting the on-callers away from red herrings, introducing urgency and
clarity by adding other stimuli,141 or asking urgent and pointed questions.142
When your disaster RPG is successful, everyone will have learned something: perhaps a new tool or trick, a different perspective on how to solve a problem, or (especially gratifying to new team members) a validation that you could have solved this week's problem if you had been picked. With some luck, this exercise will inspire teammates to eagerly look forward to next week's adventure or to ask to become the game master for an upcoming week.

Break Real Things, Fix Real Things

A newbie can learn much about SRE by reading documentation, postmortems, and taking trainings. Disaster role playing can help get a newbie's mind into the game. However, the experience derived from hands-on experience breaking and/or fixing real production systems is even better. There will be plenty of time for hands-on experience once a newbie has gone on-call, but such learning should happen before a new SRE reaches that point. Therefore, provide for such hands-on experiences much earlier in order to develop the student's reflexive responses for using your company's tooling and monitoring to approach a developing outage.
Realism is paramount in these interactions. Ideally, your team has a stack that is multihomed and provisioned in such a way that you have at least one instance you can divert from live traffic and temporarily loan to a learning exercise. Alternatively, you might have a smaller, but still fully featured, staging or QA instance of your stack that can be borrowed for a short time. If possible, subject the stack to synthetic load that approximates real user/client traffic, in addition to resource consumption, if possible.
The opportunities for learning from a real production system under synthetic load are abundant. Senior SREs will have experienced all sorts of troubles: misconfigurations, memory leaks, performance regressions, crashing queries, storage bottlenecks, and so forth. In this realistic but relatively risk-free

environment, proctors can manipulate the job set in ways that alter the behavior of the stack, forcing new SREs to find differences, determine contributing factors, and ultimately repair systems to restore appropriate behavior.
As an alternative to the overhead of asking a senior SRE to carefully plan a specific type of breakage that the new SRE(s) must repair, you can also work in the opposite direction with an exercise that may also increase participation from the entire team: work from a known good configuration and slowly impair the stack at selected bottlenecks, observing upstream and downstream efforts through your monitoring. This exercise is valued by the Google Search SRE team, whose version of this exercise is called "Let's burn a search cluster to the ground!" The exercise proceeds as follows:
1. As a group, we discuss what observable performance characteristics might change as we cripple the stack.
2. Before inflicting the planned damage, we poll the participants for their guesses and reasoning about their predictions about how the system will react.
3. We validate assumptions and justify the reasoning behind the behaviors we see.
This exercise, which we perform on a quarterly basis, shakes out new bugs that we eagerly fix, because our systems do not always degrade as gracefully as we would expect.

Documentation as Apprenticeship

Many SRE teams maintain an "on-call learning checklist," which is an organized reading and comprehension list of the technologies and concepts relevant to the system(s) they maintain. This list must be internalized by a student before they're eligible to serve as a shadow on-caller. Take a moment to revisit the example on-call learning checklist in Table 28-2. The learning checklist serves different purposes for different people:
To the student:

This doc helps establish the boundaries of the system their team supports.
By studying this list, the student gains a sense of what systems are

most important and why. When they understand the information therein, they can move on to other topics they need to learn, rather than dwelling on learning esoteric details that can be learned over time.
To mentors and managers: Student progress through the learning checklist can be observed. The checklist answers questions such as:
What sections are you working on today? What sections are the most confusing?
To all team members: The doc becomes a social contract by which (upon mastery) the student joins the ranks of on-call. The learning checklist sets the standard that all team members should aspire to and uphold.
In a rapidly changing environment, documentation can fall out of date quickly. Outdated documentation is less of a problem for senior SREs who are already up to speed, because they keep state on the world and its changes in their own heads. Newbie SREs are much more in need of up-to-date documentation, but may not feel empowered or knowledgeable enough to make changes. When designed with just the right amount of structure, on-call documentation can become an adaptable body of work that harnesses newbie enthusiasm and senior knowledge to keep everyone fresh.
In Search SRE, we anticipate the arrival of new team member(s) by reviewing our on-call learning checklist, and sorting its sections by how up-to-date they are. As the new team member arrives, we point them to the overall learning checklist, but also task them with overhauling one or two of the most outdated sections. As you can see in Table 28-2, we label the senior SRE and developer contacts for each technology. We encourage the student to make an early connection with those subject matter experts, so that they might learn the inner workings of the selected technology directly. Later, as they become more familiar with the scope and tone of the learning checklist, they are expected to contribute a revised learning checklist section, which must be peer-reviewed by one or more senior SREs that are listed as experts.

Shadow On-Call Early and Often

Ultimately,  no  amount  of  hypothetical  disaster  exercises  or  other  training

mechanisms will fully prepare an SRE for going on-call. At the end of the day, tackling real outages will always be more beneficial from a learning standpoint than engaging with hypotheticals. Yet it's unfair to make newbies wait until their first real page to have a chance to learn and retain knowledge.
After the student has made their way through all system fundamentals (by completing, for example, an on-call learning checklist), consider configuring your alerting system to copy incoming pages to your newbie, at first only during business hours. Rely on their curiosity to lead the way. These "shadow" on-call shifts are a great way for a mentor to gain visibility into a student's progress, and for a student to gain visibility into the responsibilities of being on-call. By arranging for the newbie to shadow multiple members of their team, the team will become increasingly comfortable with the thought of this person entering the on-call rotation. Instilling confidence in this manner is an effective method of building trust, allowing more senior members to detach when they aren't on- call, thus helping to avoid team burnout.
When a page comes in, the new SRE is not the appointed on-caller, a condition which removes any time pressure for the student. They now have a front-row seat to the outage while it unfolds, rather than after the issue is resolved. It may be that the student and the primary on-caller share a terminal session, or sit near each other to readily compare notes. At a time of mutual convenience after the outage is complete, the on-caller can review the reasoning and processes followed for the student's benefit. This exercise will increase the shadow on- caller's retention of what actually occurred.

Tip


Should an outage occur for which writing a postmortem is beneficial, the on- caller should include the newbie as a coauthor. Do not dump the writeup solely on the student, because it could be mislearned that postmortems are somehow grunt work to be passed off on those most junior. It would be a mistake to create such an impression.
Some teams will also include a final step: having the experienced on-caller "reverse shadow" the student. The newbie will become primary on-call and own all incoming escalations, but the experienced on-caller will lurk in the shadows, independently diagnosing the situation without modifying any state. The experienced SRE will be available to provide active support, help, validation,

and hints as necessary.

On-Call and Beyond: Rites of Passage, and Practicing Continuing Education
As comprehension increases, the student will reach a point in their career at which they are capable of reasoning through most of the stack comfortably, and can improvise their way through the rest. At this point, they should go on-call for their service. Some teams create a final exam of sorts that tests their students one last time before bestowing them with on-call powers and responsibilities. Other new SREs will submit their completion of the on-call learning checklist as evidence that they are ready. Regardless of how you gate this milestone, going on-call is a rite of passage and it should be celebrated as a team.
Does learning stop when a student joins the ranks of on-call? Of course not! To remain vigilant as SREs, your team will always need to be active and aware of changes to come. While your attention is elsewhere, portions of your stack may be rearchitected and extended, leaving your team's operational knowledge as historic at best.
Set up a regular learning series for your whole team, where overviews of new and upcoming changes to your stack are given as presentations by the SREs who are shepherding the changes, who can co-present with developers as needed. If you can, record the presentations so that you can build a training library for future students.
With some practice, you'll gain much timely involvement from both SREs within your team and developers who work closely with your team, all while keeping everyone's minds fresh about the future. There are other venues for educational engagement, too: consider having SREs give talks to your developer counterparts. The better your development peers understand your work and the challenges your team faces, the easier it will be to reach fully informed decisions on later projects.

Closing Thoughts
An upfront investment in SRE training is absolutely worthwhile, both for the students eager to grasp their production environment and for the teams grateful

to welcome students into the ranks of on-call. Through the use of applicable practices outlined in this chapter, you will create well-rounded SREs faster, while sharpening team skills in perpetuity. How you apply these practices is up to you, but the charge is clear: as SRE, you have to scale your humans faster than you scale your machines. Good luck to you and your teams in creating a culture of learning and teaching!

135And doesn't work!
136Examples of proactive SRE work include software automation, design consulting, and launch coordination.

137Examples of reactive SRE work include debugging, troubleshooting, and handling on-call escalations.

138A nod to video games of yesteryear.
139This "follow the RPC" approach also works well for batch/pipeline systems; start with the operation that kicks off the system. For batch systems, this operation could be data arriving that needs to be processed, a transaction that needs to be validated, or many other events.

140See "Life in the Trenches of healthcare.gov".
141For example: "You're getting paged by another team that brings you more information. Here's what they say..."

142For example: "We're losing money quickly! How could you stop the bleeding in the short term?"

Chapter 29 - Dealing with Interrupts
Written by Dave O'ConnorEdited by Diane Bates

"Operational load," when applied to complex systems, is the work that must be done to maintain the system in a functional state. For example, if you own a car, you (or someone you pay) always end up servicing it, putting gas in it, or doing other regular maintenance to keep it performing its function.
Any complex system is as imperfect as its creators. In managing the operational load created by these systems, remember that its creators are also imperfect machines.
Operational load, when applied to managing complex systems, takes many forms, some more obvious than others. The terminology may change, but operational load falls into three general categories: pages, tickets, and ongoing operational activities.
Pages concern production alerts and their fallout, and are triggered in response to production emergencies. They can sometimes be monotonous and recurring, requiring little thought. They can also be engaging and involve tactical in-depth thought. Pages always have an expected response time (SLO), which is sometimes measured in minutes.
Tickets concern customer requests that require you to take an action. Like pages, tickets can be either simple and boring, or require real thought. A simple ticket might request a code review for a config the team owns. A more complex ticket might entail a special or unusual request for help with a design or capacity plan. Tickets may also have an SLO, but response time is more likely measured in hours, days, or weeks.
Ongoing operational responsibilities (also known as "Kicking the can down the road" and "toil"; see Eliminating Toil) include activities like team-owned code or flag rollouts, or responses to ad hoc, time-sensitive questions from customers. While they may not have a defined SLO, these tasks can interrupt you.
Some types of operational load are easily anticipated or planned for, but much of

the load is unplanned, or can interrupt someone at a nonspecific time, requiring that person to determine if the issue can wait.

Managing Operational Load
Google has several methods of managing each type of operational load at the team level.
Pages are most commonly managed by a dedicated primary on-call engineer. This is a single person who responds to pages and manages the resulting incidents or outages. The primary on-call engineer might also manage user support communications, escalation to product developers, and so on. In order to both minimize the interruption a page causes to a team and avoid the bystander effect, Google on-call shifts are manned by a single engineer. The on-call engineer might escalate pages to another team member if a problem isn't well understood.
Typically, a secondary on-call engineer acts as a backup for the primary. The secondary engineer's duties vary. In some rotations, the secondary's only duty is to contact the primary if pages fall through. In this case, the secondary might be on another team. The secondary engineer may or may not consider themselves on interrupts, depending on duties.
Tickets are managed in a few different ways, depending on the SRE team: a primary on-call engineer might work on tickets while on-call, a secondary engineer might work on tickets while on-call, or a team can have a dedicated ticket person who is not on-call. Tickets might be randomly autodistributed among team members, or team members might be expected to service tickets ad hoc.
Ongoing operational responsibilities are also managed in varying ways. Sometimes, the on-call engineer does the work (pushes, flag flips, etc.). Alternately, each responsibility can be assigned to team members ad hoc, or an on-call engineer might pick up a lasting responsibility (i.e., a multiweek rollout or ticket) that lasts beyond their shift week.

Factors in Determining How Interrupts Are Handled

To take a step back from the mechanics of how operational load is managed, there are a number of metrics that factor into how each of these interrupts are handled. Some SRE teams at Google have found the following metrics to be useful in deciding how to manage interrupts:
Interrupt SLO or expected response time
The number of interrupts that are usually backlogged The severity of the interrupts
The frequency of the interrupts
The number of people available to handle a certain kind of interrupt (e.g., some teams require a certain amount of ticket work before going on-call)
You might notice that all of these metrics are suited to meeting the lowest possible response time, without factoring in more human costs. Trying to take stock of the human and productivity cost is difficult.

Imperfect Machines
Humans are imperfect machines. They get bored, they have processors (and sometimes UIs) that aren't very well understood, and they aren't very efficient. Recognizing the human element as "Working as Intended" and trying to work around or ameliorate how humans work could fill a much larger space than provided here; for the moment, some basic ideas might be useful in determining how interrupts should work.

Cognitive Flow State

The concept of flow state143 is widely accepted and can be empirically acknowledged by pretty much everyone who works in Software Engineering, Sysadmin, SRE, or most other disciplines that require focused periods of concentration. Being in "the zone" can increase productivity, but can also increase artistic and scientific creativity. Achieving this state encourages people to actually master and improve the task or project they're working on. Being interrupted can kick you right out of this state, if the interrupt is disruptive enough. You want to maximize the amount of time spent in this state.
Cognitive flow can also apply to less creative pursuits where the skill level required is lower, and the essential elements of flow are still fulfilled (clear

goals, immediate feedback, a sense of control, and the associated time distortion); examples include housework or driving.
You can get in the zone by working on low-skill, low-difficulty problems, such as playing a repetitive video game. You can just as easily get there by doing high-skill, high-difficulty problems, such as those an engineer might face. The methods of arriving at a cognitive flow state differ, but the outcome is essentially the same.

Cognitive flow state: Creative and engaged

This is the zone: someone works on a problem for a while, is aware of and comfortable with the parameters of the problem, and feels like they can fix it or solve it. The person works intently on the problem, losing track of time and ignoring interrupts as much as possible. Maximizing the amount of time a person can spend in this state is very desirable-they're going to produce creative results and do good work by volume. They'll be happier at the job they're doing.
Unfortunately, many people in SRE-type roles spend much of their time either trying and failing to get into this mode and getting frustrated when they cannot, or never even attempting to reach this mode, instead languishing in the interrupted state.

Cognitive flow state: Angry Birds

People enjoy performing tasks they know how to do. In fact, executing such tasks is one of the clearest paths to cognitive flow. Some SREs are on-call when they reach a state of cognitive flow. It can be very fulfilling to chase down the causes of problems, work with others, and improve the overall health of the system in such a tangible way. Conversely, for most stressed-out on-call engineers, stress is caused either by pager volume, or because they're treating on-call as an interrupt. They're trying to code or work on projects while simultaneously being on-call or on full-time interrupts. These engineers exist in a state of constant interruption, or interruptability. This working environment is extremely stressful.
On the other hand, when a person is concentrating full-time on interrupts,
interrupts stop being interrupts. At a very visceral level, making incremental

improvements to the system, whacking tickets, and fixing problems and outages becomes a clear set of goals, boundaries, and clear feedback: you close X bugs, or you stop getting paged. All that's left is distractions. When you're doing interrupts, your projects are a distraction. Even though interrupts may be a satisfying use of time in the short term, in a mixed project/on-call environment, people are ultimately happier with a balance between these two types of work. The ideal balance varies from engineer to engineer. It's important to be aware that some engineers may not actually know what balance best motivates them (or might think they know, but you may disagree).

Do One Thing Well

You might be wondering about the practical implications of what you've read thus far.
The following suggestions, based on what's worked for various SRE teams that I've managed at Google, are mainly for the benefit of team managers or influencers. This document is agnostic to personal habits-people are free to manage their own time as they see fit. The concentration here is on directing the structure of how the team itself manages interrupts, so that people aren't set up for failure because of team function or structure.

Distractibility

The ways in which an engineer may be distracted and therefore prevented from achieving a state of cognitive flow are numerous. For example: consider a random SRE named Fred. Fred comes into work on Monday morning. Fred isn't on-call or on interrupts today, so Fred would clearly like to work on his projects. He grabs a coffee, sticks on his "do not disturb" headphones, and sits at his desk. Zone time, right?
Except, at any time, any of the following things might happen:

Fred's team uses an automated ticket system to randomly assign tickets to the team. A ticket gets assigned to him, due today.
Fred's colleague is on-call and receives a page about a component that Fred is expert in, and interrupts him to ask about it.
A user of Fred's service raises the priority of a ticket that's been assigned to him since last week, when he was on-call.

A flag rollout that's rolling out over 3-4 weeks and is assigned to Fred goes wrong, forcing Fred to drop everything to examine the rollout, roll back the change, and so forth.
A user of Fred's service contacts Fred to ask a question, because Fred is such a helpful chap.
And so on.

The end result is that even though Fred has the entire calendar day free to work on projects, he remains extremely distractible. Some of these distractions he can manage himself by closing email, turning off IM, or taking other similar measures. Some distractions are caused by policy, or by assumptions around interrupts and ongoing responsibilities.
You can claim that some level of distraction is inevitable and by design. This assumption is correct: people do hang onto bugs for which they're the primary contact, and people also build up other responsibilities and obligations. However, there are ways that a team can manage interrupt response so that more people (on average) can come into work in the morning and feel undistractible.

Polarizing time

In order to limit your distractibility, you should try to minimize context switches. Some interrupts are inevitable. However, viewing an engineer as an interruptible unit of work, whose context switches are free, is suboptimal if you want people to be happy and productive. Assign a cost to context switches. A 20-minute interruption while working on a project entails two context switches; realistically, this interruption results in a loss of a couple hours of truly productive work. To avoid constant occurrences of productivity loss, aim for polarized time between work styles, with each work period lasting as long as possible. Ideally, this time period is a week, but a day or even a half-day may be more practical. This strategy also fits in with the complementary concept of make time [Gra09].
Polarizing time means that when a person comes into work each day, they should know if they're doing just project work or just interrupts. Polarizing their time in this way means they get to concentrate for longer periods of time on the task at hand. They don't get stressed out because they're being roped into tasks that drag them away from the work they're supposed to be doing.

Seriously, Tell Me What to Do

If the general model presented in this chapter doesn't work for you, here are some specific suggestions of components you can implement piecemeal.

General suggestions

For any given class of interrupt, if the volume of interrupts is too high for one person, add another person. This concept most obviously applies to tickets, but can potentially apply to pages, too-the on-call can start bumping things to their secondary, or downgrading pages to tickets.

On-call

The primary on-call engineer should focus solely on on-call work. If the pager is quiet for your service, tickets or other interrupt-based work that can be abandoned fairly quickly should be part of on-call duties. When an engineer is on-call for a week, that week should be written off as far as project work is concerned. If a project is too important to let slip by a week, that person shouldn't be on-call. Escalate in order to assign someone else to the on-call shift. A person should never be expected to be on-call and also make progress on projects (or anything else with a high context switching cost).
Secondary duties depend on how onerous those duties are. If the function of the secondary is to back up the primary in the case of a fallthrough, then maybe you can safely assume that the secondary can also accomplish project work. If someone other than the secondary is assigned to handling tickets, consider merging the roles. If the secondary is expected to actually help the primary in the case of high pager volume, they should do interrupt work, too.
(Aside: You never run out of cleanup work. Your ticket count might be at zero, but there is always documentation that needs updating, configs that need cleanup, etc. Your future on-call engineers will thank you, and it means they're less likely to interrupt you during your precious make time).

Tickets

If you currently assign tickets randomly to victims on your team, stop. Doing so

is extremely disrespectful of your team's time, and works completely counter to the principle of not being interruptible as much as possible.
Tickets should be a full-time role, for an amount of time that's manageable for a person. If you happen to be in the unenviable position of having more tickets than can be closed by the primary and secondary on-call engineers combined, then structure your ticket rotation to have two people handling tickets at any given time. Don't spread the load across the entire team. People are not machines, and you're just causing context switches that impact valuable flow time.

Ongoing responsibilities

As much as possible, define roles that let anyone on the team take up the mantle. If there's a well-defined procedure for performing and verifying pushes or flag flips, then there's no reason a person has to shepherd that change for its entire lifetime, even after they stop being on-call or on interrupts. Define a push manager role who can juggle pushes for the duration of their time on-call or on interrupts. Formalize the handover process-it's a small price to pay for uninterrupted make time for the people not on-call.

Be on interrupts, or don't be

Sometimes when a person isn't on interrupts, the team receives an interrupt that the person is uniquely qualified to handle. While ideally this scenario should never happen, it sometimes does. You should work to make such occurrences rare.
Sometimes people work on tickets when they're not assigned to handle tickets because it's an easy way to look busy. Such behavior isn't helpful. It means the person is less effective than they should be. They skew the numbers in terms of how manageable the ticket load is. If one person is assigned to tickets, but two or three other people also take a stab at the ticket queue, you might still have an unmanageable ticket queue even though you don't realize it.

Reducing Interrupts

Your team's interrupt load may be unmanageable if it requires too many team

members to simultaneously staff interrupts at any given time. There are a number of techniques you can use to reduce your ticket load overall.

Actually analyze tickets

Lots of ticket rotations or on-call rotations function like a gauntlet. This is especially true of rotations on larger teams. If you're only on interrupts every couple of months, it's easy to run the gauntlet,144 heave a sigh of relief, and then return to your regular duties. Your successor then does the same, and the root
causes of tickets are never investigated. Rather than achieving forward movement, your team is bogged down by a succession of people getting annoyed by the same issues.
There should be a handoff for tickets, as well as for on-call work. A handoff process maintains shared state between ticket handlers as responsibility switches over. Even some basic introspection into the root causes of interrupts can provide good solutions for reducing the overall rate. Lots of teams conduct on- call handoffs and page reviews. Very few teams do the same for tickets.
Your team should conduct a regular scrub for tickets and pages, in which you examine classes of interrupts to see if you can identify a root cause. If you think the root cause is fixable in a reasonable amount of time, then silence the interrupts until the root cause is expected to be fixed. Doing so provides relief for the person handling interrupts and creates a handy deadline enforcement for the person fixing the root cause.

Respect yourself, as well as your customers

This maxim applies more to user interrupts than automated interrupts, although the principles stand for both scenarios. If tickets are particularly annoying or onerous to resolve, you can effectively use policy to mitigate the burden.
Remember:

Your team sets the level of service provided by your service. It's OK to push back some of the effort onto your customers.
If your team is responsible for handling tickets or interrupts for customers, you can often use policy to make your work load more manageable. A policy fix can

be temporary or permanent, depending on what makes sense. Such a fix should strike a good balance between respect for the customer and respect for yourself. Policy can be as powerful a tool as code.
For example, if you support a particularly flaky tool that doesn't have many developer resources, and a small number of needy customers use it, consider other options. Think about the value of the time you spend doing interrupts for this system, and if you're spending this time wisely. At some point, if you can't get the attention you need to fix the root cause of the problems causing interrupts, perhaps the component you're supporting isn't that important. You should consider giving the pager back, deprecating it, replacing it, or another strategy in this vein that might make sense.
If there are particular steps for an interrupt that are time-consuming or tricky, but don't require your privileges to accomplish, consider using policy to push the request back to the requestor. For example, if people need to donate compute resources, prepare a code or config change or some similar step, and then instruct the customer to execute that step and send it for your review. Remember that if the customer wants a certain task to be accomplished, they should be prepared to spend some effort getting what they want.
A caveat to the preceding solutions is that you need to find a balance between respect for the customer and for yourself. Your guiding principle in constructing a strategy for dealing with customer requests is that the request should be meaningful, be rational, and provide all the information and legwork you need in order to fulfill the request. In return, your response should be helpful and timely.

143See	Wikipedia:	Flow	(psychology),
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flow_(psychology).

144See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Running_the_gauntlet.